Celibacy - noun - The state of abstaining from marriage and sexual relations.
Polygamy - noun - The practice or custom of having more than one wife or husband at the same time.
Monogamy - noun - The practice of marrying or state of being married to one person at a time.
Overture - noun - An orchestral piece at the beginning of an opera, play, etc. ("the overture to Mozart's ‘Don Giovanni’")
Purdah - noun - The practice in certain Muslim and Hindu societies of screening women from men or strangers, especially by means of a curtain.
Amicable - adjective - characterized by friendliness and absence of discord. ("an amicable settlement of the dispute")
Melancholy - noun - a feeling of pensive sadness, typically with no obvious cause. ("an air of melancholy surrounded him")
Soma - noun - The parts of an organism other than the reproductive cells. The body as distinct from the soul, mind, or psyche.
Stigma - noun - A mark of disgrace associated with a particular circumstance, quality, or person.
Sinister - adjective - Giving the impression that something harmful or evil is happening or will happen.
Palpable - adjective - (of a feeling or atmosphere) so intense as to seem almost tangible. ("a palpable sense of loss")
Tangible - adjective - Perceptible by touch. ("the atmosphere of neglect and abandonment was almost tangible")
Polarize - verb - Divide or cause to divide into two sharply contrasting groups or sets of opinions or beliefs. ("the cultural sphere has polarized into two competing ideological positions")
Quintessential - adjective - Representing the most perfect or typical example of a quality or class. ("he was the quintessential tough guy—strong, silent, and self-contained")
Jarring - adjective - Incongruous in a striking or shocking way; clashing. ("the telephone struck a jarring note in those Renaissance surroundings")
Incongruous - adjective - Not in harmony or keeping with the surroundings or other aspects of something. ("the duffel coat looked incongruous with the black dress she wore underneath")
Squander - verb - Waste (something, especially money or time) in a reckless and foolish manner. ("£100m of taxpayers' money has been squandered on administering the tax")
Propensity -noun - An inclination or natural tendency to behave in a particular way. ("his propensity for violence")
Innate - adjective - inborn; natural. ("her innate capacity for organization")
Segregate - verb - Set apart from the rest or from each other; isolate or divide. ("disabled people should not be segregated from the rest of society")
Pathogen - noun - MEDICINE - a bacterium, virus, or other microorganism that can cause disease
Sanctimonious - adjective - derogatory, making a show of being morally superior to other people. ("what happened to all the sanctimonious talk about putting his family first?")
Prerequisite - noun - A thing that is required as a prior condition for something else to happen or exist. ("sponsorship is not a prerequisite for any of our courses")
Passive-aggressive - adjective - Of or denoting a type of behaviour or personality characterized by indirect resistance to the demands of others and an avoidance of direct confrontation.
Shirk - verb - Avoid or neglect (a duty or responsibility). ("I do not shirk any responsibility in this matter")
Char - verb - Partially burn so as to blacken the surface. ("a region charred by bush fires")
Armament - noun - Military weapons and equipment. ("national armaments could be kept to a minimum")
Chauvinist - noun - A person displaying aggressive or exaggerated patriotism.
Emancipate - verb - Set free, especially from legal, social, or political restrictions. ("the citizen must be emancipated from the obsessive secrecy of government")
Altruism - noun - Disinterested and selfless concern for the well-being of others. ("some may choose to work with vulnerable elderly people out of altruism")
Lament - noun - A passionate expression of grief or sorrow. ("his mother's night-long laments for his father")
Lament - verb - Express passionate grief about. ("he was lamenting the death of his infant daughter")
Discord - noun - Disagreement between people. ("a prosperous family who showed no signs of discord")
Introspect - verb - Examine one's own thoughts or feelings. ("what they don't do is introspect much about the reasons for their plight")
Introspection - noun - The examination or observation of one's own mental and emotional processes. ("quiet introspection can be extremely valuable")
Lull - verb - Calm or send to sleep, typically with soothing sounds or movements. ("the rhythm of the boat lulled her to sleep")
Conservative - adjective - Averse to change or innovation and holding traditional values. "they were very conservative in their outlook"
Conservative - adjective - (in a political context) favouring free enterprise, private ownership, and socially conservative ideas.
Averse - adjective - Having a strong dislike of or opposition to something. ("as a former CIA director, he is not averse to secrecy")
Palpitation - noun - A noticeably rapid, strong, or irregular heartbeat due to agitation, exertion, or illness. "the stimulants gave me palpitations"
Banal - adjective - So lacking in originality as to be obvious and boring. ("songs with banal, repeated words")
Trite - adjective -(of a remark or idea) lacking originality or freshness; dull on account of overuse. "this point may now seem obvious and trite"
Catharsis - noun - The process of releasing, and thereby providing relief from, strong or repressed emotions. "music is a means of catharsis for them"
Strafe - verb - Attack repeatedly with bombs or machine-gun fire from low-flying aircraft. ("military aircraft strafed the village")
Incarcerate - verb - Imprison or confine. ("many are incarcerated for property offences")
Scrutiny - noun - Critical observation or examination. "every aspect of local government was placed under scrutiny"
Defoliant - noun - A chemical that removes the leaves from trees and plants, used in warfare.
Agony - noun - Extreme physical or mental suffering. "he crashed to the ground in agony"
Poignant - adjective - Evoking a keen sense of sadness or regret. "a poignant reminder of the passing of time"
Poignant - adjective - Sharp or pungent in taste or smell. "the poignant scent of her powder"
Apathetic - adjective - Showing or feeling no interest, enthusiasm, or concern. "an apathetic electorate"
Swelter - verb - Be uncomfortably hot. "Barney sweltered in his doorman's uniform"
Tantamount - adjective - Equivalent in seriousness to; virtually the same as. "the resignations were tantamount to an admission of guilt"
Fluctuate - verb - Rise and fall irregularly in number or amount. "trade with other countries tends to fluctuate from year to year"
Monetary - adjective Relating to money or currency. "documents with little or no monetary value"
Catalyst - noun - A substance that increases the rate of a chemical reaction without itself undergoing any permanent chemical change. "chlorine acts as a catalyst promoting the breakdown of ozone"
Catalyst - noun - A person or thing that precipitates an event. "the prime minister's speech acted as a catalyst for debate"
Precipitate - verb - Cause (an event or situation, typically one that is undesirable) to happen suddenly, unexpectedly, or prematurely. "the incident precipitated a political crisis"
Contempt - noun - The feeling that a person or a thing is worthless or beneath consideration. "Pam stared at the girl with total contempt"
Contempt - noun - Disregard for something that should be considered. "this action displays an arrogant contempt for the wishes of the majority"
Contempt - noun - The offence of being disobedient to or disrespectful of a court of law and its officers."when he was found to have lied to the House this was a contempt"
Manifest - verb - Show (a quality or feeling) by one's acts or appearance; demonstrate. "Lizzy manifested signs of severe depression"
Affluence - noun - The state of having a great deal of money; wealth. "a sign of our growing affluence"
Deplete - verb - Use up the supply or resources of. "fish stocks are severely depleted"
Superficial - adjective - Not thorough, deep, or complete; cursory. "he had only the most superficial knowledge of foreign countries"
Overt - adjective - Done or shown openly; plainly apparent. "an overt act of aggression"
Overtly - adverb - Without concealment or secrecy; openly. "the selection policy was not overtly stated"
Jeopardy - noun - Danger of loss, harm, or failure. "the whole peace process is in jeopardy"
Ulterior - adjective - Existing beyond what is obvious or admitted; intentionally hidden. "could there be an ulterior motive behind his request?"
Perjury - noun - The offence of wilfully telling an untruth or making a misrepresentation under oath. "he claimed two witnesses at his trial had committed perjury"
Calibre - noun - The quality of someone's character or the level of their ability. "they could ill afford to lose a man of his calibre"
Incidence - noun - The occurrence, rate, or frequency of a disease, crime, or other undesirable thing. "an increased incidence of cancer"
Tout - verb - Attempt to sell (something), typically by a direct or persistent approach. "Sanjay was touting his wares"
Taint - Verb - Contaminate or pollute (something). "the air was tainted by fumes from the cars"
Taint - Verb - Affect with a bad or undesirable quality. "his administration was tainted by scandal"
Prestigious - adjective - Inspiring respect and admiration; having high status. "a prestigious academic post"
Pioneer - noun - A person who is among the first to explore or settle a new country or area. "the pioneers of the Wild West"
Pioneer - noun - A person who is among the first to research and develop a new area of knowledge or activity. "a famous pioneer of birth control"
Succumb - verb - Fail to resist pressure, temptation, or some other negative force. "we cannot merely give up and succumb to despair"
Karoshi - noun - (in Japan) death caused by overwork or job-related exhaustion. "karoshi victims"
Cryptic - adjective - Having a meaning that is mysterious or obscure. "he found his boss's utterances too cryptic
Ethereal - adjective - Extremely delicate and light in a way that seems not to be of this world. "her ethereal beauty"
Regicide - noun - The action of killing a king.
Ecology - noun - The branch of biology that deals with the relations of organisms to one another and to their physical surroundings.
Mercenary - adjective - Primarily concerned with making money at the expense of ethics. "she's nothing but a mercenary little gold-digger"
Mercenary - noun - A professional soldier hired to serve in a foreign army. "he had planned to seize power with the aid of a group of mercenaries"
Formidable - adjective - Inspiring fear or respect through being impressively large, powerful, intense, or capable. "a formidable opponent"
Advent - noun - The arrival of a notable person or thing. "the advent of television"
Spur - verb - Urge (a horse) forward by digging one's spurs into its sides. "she spurred her horse towards the hedge"
Spur - verb - Promote the development of; stimulate. "governments cut interest rates to spur demand"
Benefactor - noun - A person who gives money or other help to a person or cause. "a low-interest loan from a benefactor allowed them to build a floor for the exhibition hall"
Corroborate - verb - Confirm or give support to (a statement, theory, or finding). "the witness had corroborated the boy's account of the attack"
Endeavour - verb - Try hard to do or achieve something. "he is endeavouring to help the Third World"
Endeavour - noun - An attempt to achieve a goal. "an endeavour to reduce serious injury"
Retrospect - noun - A survey or review of a past course of events or period of time. "a full retrospect of the battle"
Esoteric - adjective - Intended for or likely to be understood by only a small number of people with a specialized knowledge or interest. "esoteric philosophical debates"
Arduous - adjective - Involving or requiring strenuous effort; difficult and tiring. "an arduous journey"
Strenuous - adjective - Requiring or using great effort or exertion. "the government made strenuous efforts to upgrade the quality of the teaching profession"
Exertion - noun - Physical or mental effort. "she was panting with the exertion"
Incitement - noun - The action of provoking unlawful behaviour or urging someone to behave unlawfully. "this amounted to an incitement to commit murder"
Daunting - adjective - Seeming difficult to deal with in prospect; intimidating. "a daunting task"
Appease - verb - Pacify or placate (someone) by acceding to their demands. "amendments have been added to appease local pressure groups"
Anaemic - adjective - Lacking in colour, spirit, or vitality. "an anaemic aspidistra stood in the grate"
Porous - adjective - (of a rock or other material) having minute interstices through which liquid or air may pass. "layers of porous limestones"
Porous - adjective - Not retentive or secure. "he ran through a porous home defence to score easily"
Precedent - noun - An earlier event or action that is regarded as an example or guide to be considered in subsequent similar circumstances. "there are substantial precedents for using interactive media in training"
Precedent - noun - LAW A previous case or legal decision that may be or ( binding precedent ) must be followed in subsequent similar cases.
Curtailment - noun - The action or fact of reducing or restricting something. "the curtailment of human rights"
Augur - verb - (of an event or circumstance) portend a good or bad outcome. "the end of the cold war seemed to augur well"
Imperceptible - adjective - So slight, gradual, or subtle as not to be perceived. "his head moved in an almost imperceptible nod"
Cohort - noun - A group of people with a shared characteristic. "a cohort of civil servants patiently drafting legislation"
Disgruntled - adjective - Angry or dissatisfied. "judges receive letters from disgruntled members of the public"
Boorish - adjective - Rough and bad-mannered; coarse. "boorish behaviour"
Reprehensible - adjective - Deserving censure or condemnation. "his complacency and reprehensible laxity"
Paramount - adjective - More important than anything else; supreme. "the interests of the child are of paramount importance"
Amnesty - noun - An official pardon for people who have been convicted of political offences. "an amnesty for political prisoners"
Apostasy - noun - The abandonment or renunciation of a religious or political belief or principle. "the execution of their leader for apostasy brought widespread criticism"
Lucrative - adjective - Producing a great deal of profit. "a lucrative career as a stand-up comedian"
Qualm - noun - An uneasy feeling of doubt, worry, or fear, especially about one's own conduct; a misgiving. "military regimes generally have no qualms about controlling the press"
Epithet - noun - An adjective or phrase expressing a quality or attribute regarded as characteristic of the person or thing mentioned. "old men are often unfairly awarded the epithet ‘dirty’"
Deplorable - adjective - Deserving strong condemnation; completely unacceptable. "children living in deplorable conditions"
Ample - adjective - Enough or more than enough; plentiful. "there is ample time for discussion"
Zealot - noun - A person who is fanatical and uncompromising in pursuit of their religious, political, or other ideals.
Enthral - verb - Capture the fascinated attention of. "she had been so enthralled by the adventure that she had hardly noticed the cold"
Exodus - noun - A mass departure of people. "the annual exodus of sun-seeking Canadians to Florida"
Contemporary - adjective - Living or occurring at the same time. "the event was recorded by a contemporary historian"
Contemporary - adjective - Belonging to or occurring in the present. "the tension and complexities of our contemporary society"
Contemporary - noun - A person or thing living or existing at the same time as another. "he was a contemporary of Darwin"
Candid - adjective - Truthful and straightforward; frank. "his responses were remarkably candid"
Candid - adjective - (of a photograph of a person) taken informally, especially without the subject's knowledge. "it is better to let the photographer mingle among the guests and take candid shots"
Subvert - verb - Undermine the power and authority of (an established system or institution). "an attempt to subvert democratic government"
Latter - adjective - Occurring or situated nearer to the end of something than to the beginning. "the latter half of 1989"
Latter - adjective - Denoting the second or second mentioned of two people or things. "the Russians could advance into either Germany or Austria—they chose the latter option"
Virtuous - adjective - Having or showing high moral standards. "she considered herself very virtuous because she neither drank nor smoked"
Audacity - noun - a willingness to take bold risks. "he whistled at the sheer audacity of the plan"
Totalitarian - adjective - Relating to a system of government that is centralized and dictatorial and requires complete subservience to the state. "a totalitarian regime"
Egregious - adjective - Outstandingly bad; shocking. "egregious abuses of copyright"
Secular - adjective - Not connected with religious or spiritual matters. "secular buildings"
Vast - adjective - Of very great extent or quantity; immense. "a vast plain full of orchards"
Antithetical - adjective - Directly opposed or contrasted; mutually incompatible. "people whose religious beliefs are antithetical to mine"
Collude - verb - Come to a secret understanding; conspire. "the president accused his opponents of colluding with foreigners"
Circumvent - verb - Find a way around (an obstacle). "if you come to an obstruction in a road you can seek to circumvent it"
Crass - adjective - Showing no intelligence or sensitivity. "the crass assumptions that men make about women"
Paradigm - noun - A typical example or pattern of something; a pattern or model. "society's paradigm of the ‘ideal woman’"
Wreak - verb - Cause (a large amount of damage or harm). "torrential rainstorms wreaked havoc yesterday"
Sedition - noun - Conduct or speech inciting people to rebel against the authority of a state or monarch.
Contingency - noun - A future event or circumstance which is possible but cannot be predicted with certainty. "a detailed contract which attempts to provide for all possible contingencies"
Abrogate - verb - Repeal or do away with (a law, right, or formal agreement). "a proposal to abrogate temporarily the right to strike"
Apotheosis - noun - The highest point in the development of something; a culmination or climax. "his appearance as Hamlet was the apotheosis of his career"
Ratification - noun - The action of signing or giving formal consent to a treaty, contract, or agreement, making it officially valid. "ratification of the treaty raised problems in several member states"
Unsavoury - adjective - Disagreeable to taste, smell, or look at. "they looked at the scanty, unsavoury portions of food doled out to them"
Unsavoury - adjective - Disagreeable and unpleasant because morally disreputable. "an unsavoury reputation"
Renege - verb - Go back on a promise, undertaking, or contract. "the government had reneged on its election promises"
Dissent - noun - The holding or expression of opinions at variance with those commonly or officially held. "there was no dissent from this view"
Penchant - noun - A strong or habitual liking for something or tendency to do something. "he has a penchant for adopting stray dogs"
Append - verb - Add (something) to the end of a written document. "the results of the survey are appended to this chapter"
Rampant - adjective -(especially of something unwelcome) flourishing or spreading unchecked. "political violence was rampant"
QUOTE: "Everybody has a game plan until you punch them in the mouth.” - Mike Tyson
Imbue - verb - Inspire or permeate with (a feeling or quality). "his works are invariably imbued with a sense of calm and serenity"
Downtrodden - adjective - Oppressed or treated badly by people in power. "a downtrodden proletarian struggling for social justice"
Onerous - adjective - (of a task or responsibility) involving a great deal of effort, trouble, or difficulty. "he found his duties increasingly onerous"
Vanguard - noun - A group of people leading the way in new developments or ideas. "the experimental spirit of the modernist vanguard"
Implicate - verb - Show (someone) to be involved in a crime. "he implicated his government in the murders of three judges"
Muster - verb - Assemble (troops), especially for inspection or in preparation for battle. "17,000 men had been mustered on Haldon Hill"
Muster - verb - Collect or assemble (a number or amount). "he could fail to muster a majority"
Sordid - adjective - Involving immoral or dishonourable actions and motives; arousing moral distaste and contempt. "the story paints a sordid picture of bribes and scams"
Sordid - adjective - Dirty or squalid. "the overcrowded housing conditions were sordid and degrading"
Squalid - adjective - (of a place) extremely dirty and unpleasant, especially as a result of poverty or neglect. "the squalid, overcrowded prison"
Perennial - adjective - Lasting or existing for a long or apparently infinite time; enduring or continually recurring. "his perennial distrust of the media"
Perennial - adjective - (of a plant) living for several years. "cow parsley is perennial"
Clamour - noun - A loud and confused noise, especially that of people shouting. "the questions rose to a clamour"
Indoctrination - noun - The process of teaching a person or group to accept a set of beliefs uncritically. "I would never subject children to religious indoctrination"
Malevolent - adjective - Having or showing a wish to do evil to others. "the glint of dark, malevolent eyes"
Odyssey - noun - A long wandering or voyage usually marked by many changes of fortune
Grandiose - adjective - Extravagantly or pretentiously imposing in appearance or style. "the court's grandiose facade"
Precept - noun - A general rule intended to regulate behaviour or thought. "the legal precept of being innocent until proven guilty"
Divergent - adjective - Tending to be different or develop in different directions "divergent interpretations"
Endearing - adjective - Inspiring affection. "an endearing little grin"
Bona fide - adjective - Genuine; real. "she was a bona fide expert"
Aggrandize - verb - Increase the power, status, or wealth of. "an action intended to aggrandize the Frankish dynasty"
Ad hominem - noun - (of an argument or reaction) directed against a person rather than the position they are maintaining. "an ad hominem response"
Ubiquitous - adjective - Present, appearing, or found everywhere. "his ubiquitous influence was felt by all the family"
Canard - noun - An unfounded rumour or story. "the old canard that LA is a cultural wasteland"
Mantra - noun - (originally in Hinduism and Buddhism) a word or sound repeated to aid concentration in meditation. "a mantra is given to a trainee meditator when his teacher initiates him"
Mantra - noun - A statement or slogan repeated frequently. "the environmental mantra that energy has for too long been too cheap"
Populist - noun - A member or adherent of a political party seeking to represent the interests of ordinary people
Aura - noun - The distinctive atmosphere or quality that seems to surround and be generated by a person, thing, or place. "the ceremony retains an aura of mystery"
Aristocracy - noun - The highest class in certain societies, typically comprising people of noble birth holding hereditary titles and offices. "members of the aristocracy"
Avarice - noun - Extreme greed for wealth or material gain. "he was rich beyond the dreams of avarice"
Stringent - adjective - (of regulations, requirements, or conditions) strict, precise, and exacting. "stringent guidelines on air pollution"
Exuberant - adjective - Full of energy, excitement, and cheerfulness. "a noisy bunch of exuberant youngsters"
Semblance - noun - The outward appearance or apparent form of something, especially when the reality is different. "she tried to force her thoughts back into some semblance of order"
Blue-collar - adjective - Relating to manual work or workers, particularly in industry. "a blue-collar neighbourhood"
QUOTE: "If a person can tell me the idea in 25 words or less, it's going to make a pretty good movie" - Stephen Speilberg
Pew - noun - A long bench with a back, placed in rows in the main part of some churches to seat the congregation.
Congregation - noun - A group of people assembled for religious worship. "the singing of psalms by the whole congregation"
Incur - verb - Become subject to (something unwelcome or unpleasant) as a result of one's own behaviour or actions. "I will pay any expenses incurred"
Deadpan - adjective - Impassive or expressionless. "she delivered her monologue in a deadpan voice"
Immutable - adjective - Unchanging over time or unable to be changed. "an immutable fact"
Brazenly - adverb - In a bold and shameless way. "they are brazenly defying the law"
QUOTE: "Freedom is never more than one generation away from extinction. We didn't pass it to our children in the bloodstream. It must be fought for, protected, and handed on for them to do the same." - Ronald Regan
Acquisition - noun - An asset or object bought or obtained, typically by a library or museum. "the legacy will be used for new acquisitions"
Denouement - noun - The final part of a play, film, or narrative in which the strands of the plot are drawn together and matters are explained or resolved. "the film's denouement was unsatisfying and ambiguous"
Superimpose - verb - Place or lay (one thing) over another, typically so that both are still evident. "the number will appear on the screen, superimposed on a flashing button"
Sporadically - adverb - Occasionally or at irregular intervals. "he worked sporadically at part-time jobs"
Devoid - adjective - Entirely lacking or free from. "Lisa kept her voice devoid of emotion"
Haphazard - adjective - Lacking any obvious principle of organization. "the music business works in a haphazard fashion"
Tentative - adjective - Not certain or fixed; provisional. "a tentative conclusion"
Tentative - adjective - Done without confidence; hesitant. "he eventually tried a few tentative steps round his hospital room"
Diligent - adjective - Having or showing care and conscientiousness in one's work or duties. "after diligent searching, he found a parcel"
Glean - verb - Obtain (information) from various sources, often with difficulty. "the information is gleaned from press cuttings"
Succinct - adjective - (especially of something written or spoken) briefly and clearly expressed. "use short, succinct sentences"
Syntax - noun - The arrangement of words and phrases to create well-formed sentences in a language. "the syntax of English"
Anomalous - adjective - Deviating from what is standard, normal, or expected. "an anomalous situation"
Pertinent - adjective - Relevant or applicable to a particular matter; apposite. "she asked me a lot of very pertinent questions"
Apposite - adjective - Apt in the circumstances or in relation to something. "an apposite quotation"
Enumerate - verb - Mention (a number of things) one by one. "there is not space to enumerate all his works"
Unequivocal - adjective - Leaving no doubt; unambiguous. "an unequivocal answer"
Fester - verb - (of a wound or sore) become septic; suppurate. "a festering abscess"
Fester - verb - (of food or rubbish) become rotten and offensive to the senses. "piles of mouldy grey paper festered by the sink"
Fester - verb - (of a negative feeling or a problem) become worse or more intense, especially through long-term neglect or indifference. "below the surface, the old antagonisms festered"
Demagogue - noun - A political leader who seeks support by appealing to popular desires and prejudices rather than by using rational argument. "the Senator was a gifted demagogue, with particular skill in manipulating the press"
Exuberant - adjective - Full of energy, excitement, and cheerfulness. "a noisy bunch of exuberant youngsters"
Cranny - noun - A small, narrow space or opening. "bugs and spiders conceal themselves in crannies of the bark"
Flux - noun - Continuous change. "the whole political system is in a state of flux"
Adversity - noun - A difficult or unpleasant situation. "resilience in the face of adversity"
Formidable - adjective - Inspiring fear or respect through being impressively large, powerful, intense, or capable. "a formidable opponent"
Homogenize - verb - Make uniform or similar. "a homogenized society"
Pivotal - adjective - Of crucial importance in relation to the development or success of something else. "Japan's pivotal role in the world economy"
QUOTE: "Combat training strips you of your self-image so you can be rebuilt to fit the Army mold." - Bruce Gilkin, Vietnam Veteran
Complacent - adjective - Showing smug or uncritical satisfaction with oneself or one's achievements. "you can't afford to be complacent about security"
Aeon - noun - An indefinite and very long period of time. "he reached the crag aeons before I arrived"
Infer - verb - Deduce or conclude (something) from evidence and reasoning rather than from explicit statements. "from these facts we can infer that crime has been increasing"
Cataclysmic - adjective - (of a natural event) large-scale and violent."a cataclysmic earthquake"
Oscillate - verb - Move or swing back and forth in a regular rhythm. "the grain pan near the front of the combine oscillates back and forth"
Oscillate - verb - Vary or fluctuate between two states, limits, opinions, etc. "he was oscillating between fear and bravery"
Dynasty - noun - A line of hereditary rulers of a country. "the Tang dynasty"
Anthropology - noun - The study of human societies and cultures and their development.
Glum - adjective - Looking or feeling dejected; morose. "the princess looked glum but later cheered up"
Furrow - noun - A long, narrow trench made in the ground by a plough, especially for planting seeds or irrigation. "regular furrows in a ploughed field"
Furrow - noun - A line or wrinkle on a person's face."there were deep furrows in his brow"
Fecundity - noun - The ability to produce an abundance of offspring or new growth; fertility. "multiply mated females show increased fecundity"
Eurhythmic - adjective - Characterized by a pleasing rhythm; harmoniously ordered or proportioned.
Egalitarian - adjective - Believing in or based on the principle that all people are equal and deserve equal rights and opportunities. "a fairer, more egalitarian society"
Scrupulous - adjective - (of a person or process) careful, thorough, and extremely attentive to details. "the research has been carried out with scrupulous attention to detail"
Scrupulous - adjective - Very concerned to avoid doing wrong. "she's too scrupulous to have an affair with a married man"
Venerate - verb - Regard with great respect; revere. "Philip of Beverley was venerated as a saint"
Anarchism - noun - Belief in the abolition of all government and the organization of society on a voluntary, cooperative basis without recourse to force or compulsion.
FACT: Turkey's capital is Ankara, not Istanbull. Catalhoyuk is in Konya.
Acquittal - noun - A judgement or verdict that a person is not guilty of the crime with which they have been charged. "the trial resulted in an acquittal"
Deity - noun - A god or goddess (in a polytheistic religion). "a deity of ancient Greece"
Deity - noun - Divine status, quality, or nature. "a ruler driven by delusions of deity"
Polytheism - noun - The doctrine of or belief in more than one god or in many gods.
Divine - adjective - Of or like God or a god. "heroes with divine powers"
Divine - adjective - INFORMAL very pleasing; delightful. "he had the most divine smile"
Coalesce - verb - Come together to form one mass or whole. "the puddles had coalesced into shallow streams"
FACT: Mesopotamia (land between to rivers) Tigris, Euphrates.
FACT: Gilgamesh first great literatre of king who may or may not have existed in Mesopotamia.
Brawn - noun - Physical strength in contrast to intelligence. "commando work required as much brain as brawn"
Courtesan - noun - A prostitute, especially one with wealthy or upper-class clients. "they diverted their remaining funds into frequenting courtesans"
Latterly - adverb - Recently. "latterly, his painting has shown a new freedom of expression"
Latterly - adverb - In the later stages of something, especially of a person's life. "he worked on the paper for fifty years, latterly as its political editor"
FACT: The Yellow River is the third longest river in Asia
Capricious - adjective - Given to sudden and unaccountable changes of mood or behaviour. "a capricious and often brutal administration"
Capricious - adjective - Changing according to no discernible rules; unpredictable. "a capricious climate"
Dyke - noun - A long wall or embankment built to prevent flooding from the sea.
Fanatic - noun - A person filled with excessive and single-minded zeal, especially for an extreme religious or political cause. "religious fanatics"
Fanatic - noun - INFORMAL A person with an obsessive interest in and enthusiasm for a particular activity. "a fitness fanatic"
Fanatic - adjective - Filled with or expressing excessive zeal. "his eyes had a fanatic iciness"
Calloused - adjective - (of a part of the body) having an area of hardened skin."a calloused palm"
Callous - adjective - Showing or having an insensitive and cruel disregard for others. "his callous comments about the murder made me shiver"
Callus - noun - A thickened and hardened part of the skin or soft tissue, especially in an area that has been subjected to friction.
Spate - noun -  A large number of similar things coming in quick succession. "a spate of attacks on holidaymakers"
Diligence - noun - Careful and persistent work or effort. "few party members challenge his diligence as an MP"
Upend - verb - Set or turn (something) on its end or upside down. "she upended a can of soup over the portions"
Primordial - adjective - Existing at or from the beginning of time; primeval. "the primordial oceans"
FACT: Chinese myth, The human race, evolved from parasites that infested Pan Gu's body. (Element of early human self-criticism?)
Spindly - adjective - Long or tall and thin. "spindly arms and legs"
Spindly - adjective - Weak or insubstantial in construction. "spindly chairs"
Arable - adjective - (of land) used or suitable for growing crops. "acres of arable land"
Alluvium - noun - A deposit of clay, silt, and sand left by flowing floodwater in a river valley or delta, typically producing fertile soil.
Divert - verb - Cause (someone or something) to change course or turn from one direction to another. "a scheme to divert water from the river to irrigate agricultural land"
Divert - verb - Distract (someone) from something. "she managed to divert Rose from the dangerous topic of Lady Usk"
Imposition - noun - The action or process of imposing something or of being imposed. "the imposition of martial law"
Impose - verb - Force (an unwelcome decision or ruling) on someone. "the decision was theirs and was not imposed on them by others"
Impose - verb - Take advantage of someone by demanding their attention or commitment. "she realized that she had imposed on Mark's kindness"
Gape - verb - Be or become wide open. "a carpet bag gaped open by her feet"
Gape - verb - Stare with one's mouth open wide in amazement or wonder. "he gaped at Sharp in silence"
Kitsch - noun - Art, objects, or design considered to be in poor taste because of excessive garishness or sentimentality, but sometimes appreciated in an ironic or knowing way. "the lava lamp is a bizarre example of sixties kitsch"
Kitsch - noun - Considered to be in poor taste but appreciated in an ironic or knowing way. "the front room is stuffed with kitsch knick-knacks, little glass and gilt ornaments"
Humble - adjective - Having or showing a modest or low estimate of one's importance."I felt very humble when meeting her"
Encroach - verb - Intrude on (a person's territory, rights, personal life, etc.). "rather than encroach on his privacy she might have kept to her room"
Disinherit - verb - Change one's will or take other steps to prevent (someone) from inheriting one's property. "the Duke is seeking to disinherit his eldest son"
Illicit - adjective - Forbidden by law, rules, or custom. "illicit drugs"
Dubious - adjective - Hesitating or doubting. "I was rather dubious about the whole idea"
Dubious - adjective - Not to be relied upon; suspect. "extremely dubious assumptions"
Dubious - adjective - Morally suspect. "timeshare has been brought into disrepute by dubious sales methods"
Predilection - noun - A preference or special liking for something; a bias in favour of something. "your predilection for pretty girls"
Sinuous - adjective - Having many curves and turns. "the river follows a sinuous trail through the dale"
Adorn - verb - Make more beautiful or attractive. "pictures and prints adorned his walls"
Ornate - adjective - Elaborately or highly decorated. "an ornate wrought-iron railing"
Ornate - adjective - (of literary style) using unusual words and complex constructions. "peculiarly ornate and metaphorical language"
Waft - verb - (with reference to a scent, sound, etc.) pass or cause to pass gently through the air. "the smell of stale fat wafted out from the cafe"
Precarious - adjective - Not securely held or in position; dangerously likely to fall or collapse. "a precarious ladder"
Precarious - adjective - Dependent on chance; uncertain. "he made a precarious living as a painter"
Tantalize - verb - Torment or tease (someone) with the sight or promise of something that is unobtainable. "such ambitious questions have long tantalized the world's best thinkers"
Tantalize - verb - Excite the senses or desires of (someone). "she still tantalized him"
Dreary - adjective - Depressingly dull and bleak or repetitive. "the dreary round of working, eating, and trying to sleep"
Incessant - adjective - (of something regarded as unpleasant) continuing without pause or interruption. "the incessant beat of the music"
Mutinous - adjective - (of a soldier or sailor) refusing to obey the orders of a person in authority. "mutinous soldiers occupied the radio station"
Statelet - noun - A small state, especially one that is closely affiliated to or has emerged from the break-up of a larger state.
FACT: The capital of Lebanon is Beirut
Cosmopolitan - adjective - Familiar with and at ease in many different countries and cultures. "his knowledge of French, Italian, and Spanish made him genuinely cosmopolitan"
Cosmopolitan - adjective - Including people from many different countries. "immigration transformed the city into a cosmopolitan metropolis"
Cosmopolitan - adjective - Having an exciting and glamorous character associated with travel and a mixture of cultures. "their designs became a byword for cosmopolitan chic"
Cosmopolitan - adjective - (of a plant or animal) found all over the world.
Brim - verb - Be full to the point of overflowing. "a brimming cup"
Brim - verb - Fill something so completely that it almost overflows. "large tears brimmed in her eyes"
Brim - verb - Be full of a particular quality, feeling, etc. "he is brimming with ideas"
Rebut - verb - Claim or prove that (evidence or an accusation) is false. "he had to rebut charges of acting for the convenience of his political friends"
Rebuttal - noun - An instance of rebutting evidence or an accusation.
Purport - verb - Appear to be or do something, especially falsely. "she is not the person she purports to be"
Extort - verb - Obtain (something) by force, threats, or other unfair means. "he attempted to extort money from the company"
Humdrum - adjective - Lacking excitement or variety; boringly monotonous. "humdrum routine work"
Oust - verb - Drive out or expel (someone) from a position or place. "the reformists were ousted from power"
Flay - verb - Strip the skin off (a corpse or carcass). "the captured general was flayed alive"
Flay - verb - Whip or beat (someone) so harshly as to remove their skin. "he flayed them viciously with a branch"
Flay - verb - Criticize severely and brutally. "he flayed the government for not moving fast enough on economic reform"
Strident - adjective - (of a sound) loud and harsh; grating. "his voice had become increasingly strident"
Grating - adjective - Sounding harsh and unpleasant. "a harsh grating voice came out of the speakers above the door"
Exile - noun - The state of being barred from one's native country, typically for political or punitive reasons. "he knew now that he would die in exile"
Heathen - noun - A person who does not belong to a widely held religion (especially one who is not a Christian, Jew, or Muslim) as regarded by those who do. "my brother and I were raised, as my grandma puts it, as heathens"
Abode - noun - A place of residence; a house or home. "my humble abode"
Repress - verb - Subdue (someone or something) by force. "the uprisings were repressed"
FACT: Astana is the capital of Kazakhstan
Credulous - adjective - Having or showing too great a readiness to believe things. "a ceremony staged for credulous tourists"
Indecorous - adjective - Not in keeping with good taste and propriety; improper. "a pub crawl with sundry indecorous adventures"
Usurp - verb - Take (a position of power or importance) illegally or by force. "Richard usurped the throne"
Prurient - adjective - Having or encouraging an excessive interest in sexual matters, especially the sexual activity of others. "she'd been the subject of much prurient curiosity"
QUOTE: "No one is fool enough to choose war instead of peace - in peace sons bury fathers, but in war fathers bury sons" - Herodotus
Abhor - verb - Regard with disgust and hatred. "he abhorred sexism in every form"
Hegemony - noun - Leadership or dominance, especially by one state or social group over others. "Germany was united under Prussian hegemony after 1871"
Solidarity - noun - Unity or agreement of feeling or action, especially among individuals with a common interest; mutual support within a group. "factory workers voiced solidarity with the striking students"
Pantheon - noun - All the gods of a people or religion collectively. "the deities of the Hindu pantheon"
Emphatically - adverb - In a forceful way. "she closed the door behind her emphatically"
Emphatically - adverb - Without doubt; clearly. "Jane, though born in California, feels emphatically English"
Subsidiary - adjective - Less important than but related or supplementary to something. "a subsidiary flue of the main chimney"
Subsidiary - adjective - A company controlled by a holding company. "a subsidiary of Cable and Wireless"
Uncouth - adjective - Lacking good manners, refinement, or grace. "he is unwashed, uncouth, and drunk most of the time"
Uncouth - adjective - (of art or language) lacking sophistication or delicacy. "uncouth sketches of peasants"
Robust - adjective - Strong and healthy; vigorous. "the Caplan family are a robust lot"
Robust - adjective - (of an object) sturdy in construction. "a robust metal cabinet"
Robust - adjective - (of a system, organization, etc.) able to withstand or overcome adverse conditions. "the country's political system has continued to be robust in spite of its economic problems"
Robust - adjective - (of wine or food) strong and rich in flavour or smell. "a robust mixture of fish, onions, capers and tomatoes"
Ostracize - verb - Exclude from a society or group. "she was declared a witch and ostracized by the villagers"
Ostracize - verb - (in ancient Greece) banish (an unpopular or overly powerful citizen) from a city for five or ten years by popular vote.
Protrude - verb - Extend beyond or above a surface. "something like a fin protruded from the water"
Abscond - verb - Leave hurriedly and secretly, typically to escape from custody or avoid arrest. "the barman absconded with a week's takings"
Abscond - verb - (of a person on bail) fail to surrender oneself for custody at the appointed time. "charges of absconding while on bail"
Partisan - noun - A strong supporter of a party, cause, or person. "partisans of the exiled Stuarts"
Partisan - adjective - Prejudiced in favour of a particular cause. "newspapers have become increasingly partisan"
Despotism - noun - The exercise of absolute power, especially in a cruel and oppressive way. "the ideology of enlightened despotism"
Despotism - noun - A country or political system where the ruler holds absolute power. "some nations are democracies, others are despotisms"
Intone - verb - Say or recite with little rise and fall of the pitch of the voice. "he intoned a short Latin prayer"
Indigenous - adjective - Originating or occurring naturally in a particular place; native. "the indigenous peoples of Siberia"
Outlandish - adjective - Looking or sounding bizarre or unfamiliar. "outlandish, brightly coloured clothes"
FACT: Capital of India is New Delhi
Rung - noun - A horizontal support on a ladder for a person's foot.
Crude - adjective - In a natural or raw state; not yet processed or refined. "crude oil"
Crude - adjective - Constructed in a rudimentary or makeshift way. "a relatively crude nuclear weapon"
Crude - adjective - Offensively coarse or rude, especially in relation to sexual matters. "a crude joke"
FACT: According to the bible, Jesus was about 32-33 when He was Crucified.
Dissident - noun - A person who opposes official policy, especially that of an authoritarian state. "a dissident who had been jailed by a military regime"
Dissident - adjective - In opposition to official policy. "the measure was supported by dissident Tories"
Terse - adjective - Sparing in the use of words; abrupt. "a terse statement"
Embellish - verb - Make (something) more attractive by the addition of decorative details or features. "blue silk embellished with golden embroidery"
Embellish - verb - Make (a statement or story) more interesting by adding extra details that are often untrue. "followers often embellish stories about their heroes"
Ascetic - adjective - Characterized by severe self-discipline and abstention from all forms of indulgence, typically for religious reasons. "an ascetic life of prayer, fasting, and manual labour"
Mortification - noun - Great embarrassment and shame. "they mistook my mortification for an admission of guilt"
Mortification - noun - The action of subduing one's bodily desires. "mortification of the flesh has a long tradition in some religions"
Indulge - verb - Allow oneself to enjoy the pleasure of. "we indulged in a cream tea"
Indulge - verb - Allow (someone) to enjoy something desired. "a luxury service used to indulge the chief executive"
FACT: Buddha "Enlightened one" spent 49 days and nights under a fig tree to achieve enlightenment. 
Serenity - noun - The state of being calm, peaceful, and untroubled. "an oasis of serenity amidst the bustling city"
Aghast - adjective - Filled with horror or shock. "she winced, aghast at his cruelty"
Meagre - adjective - (of something provided or available) lacking in quantity or quality. "they were forced to supplement their meagre earnings"
Rue - verb - Bitterly regret (something one has done or allowed to happen) and wish it undone. "Ferguson will rue the day he turned down that offer"
Falter - verb - Lose strength or momentum. "the music faltered, stopped, and started up again"
Strife - noun - Angry or bitter disagreement over fundamental issues; conflict. "strife within the community"
Menial - adjective - (of work) not requiring much skill and lacking prestige. "menial factory jobs"
Apportion - verb - Divide up and share out. "voting power will be apportioned according to contribution"
QUOTE: "Stay away from negative people. They have a problem for every solution" - Albert Einstein
Eradicate - verb - Destroy completely; put an end to. "this disease has been eradicated from the world"
Officiate - verb - Act as an official in charge of something, especially a sporting event. "three judges will officiate at the two Grands Prix"
QUOTE: "As thing cut, as thing filed, as thing chiselled, as thing polished" - Analects
Rigorous - adjective - Extremely thorough and careful. "the rigorous testing of consumer products"
Rigorous - adjective - (of a rule, system, etc.) strictly applied or adhered to. "rigorous controls on mergers"
Rigorous - adjective - (of a person) adhering strictly to a belief or system. "a rigorous teetotaller"
Concubine - noun - HISTORICAL (in polygamous societies) a woman who lives with a man but has lower status than his wife or wives
Exalt - verb - Think or speak very highly of (someone or something). "the party will continue to exalt their hero"
Exalt - verb - Raise to a higher rank or position. "this naturally exalts the peasant above his brethren in the same rank of society"
Deride - verb - Express contempt for; ridicule. "the decision was derided by environmentalists"
Asphyxiation - noun - The state or process of being deprived of oxygen, which can result in unconsciousness or death; suffocation. "the cause of death was asphyxiation"
Wane - verb - (of the moon) have a progressively smaller part of its visible surface illuminated, so that it appears to decrease in size.
Wane - verb - (of a state or feeling) decrease in vigour or extent; become weaker. "confidence in the dollar waned"
Trounce - verb - Defeat heavily in a contest. "Essex trounced Cambridgeshire 5–1 in the final"
Trounce - verb - Rebuke or punish severely. "insider dealing has been roundly trounced"
Inextricably - adverb - In a way that is impossible to disentangle or separate. "for many top executives, golf and business are inextricably linked"
Oligarchy - noun - A small group of people having control of a country or organization."the ruling oligarchy of military men around the president"
Eminent - adjective - (of a person) famous and respected within a particular sphere. "one of the world's most eminent statisticians"
Eminent - adjective - (of a positive quality) present to a notable degree. "the book's scholarship and eminent readability"
Purvey - verb - Provide or supply (food, drink, or other goods) as one's business. "shops purveying cooked food"
Archipelago - noun - An extensive group of islands. "the Indonesian archipelago"
Reverberate - verb - (of a loud noise) be repeated several times as an echo. "her deep booming laugh reverberated around the room"
Reverberate - verb - Have continuing and serious effects. "the statements by the professor reverberated through the Capitol"
Disarray - noun - A state of disorganization or untidiness. "her grey hair was in disarray"
Disarray - verb - Throw into a state of disorganization or untidiness. "the inspection disarrayed the usual schedule"
QUOTE: Phillip II (Father of Alexander the Great): "for if I bring my army on your land, I will destroy your farms, slay your people and raze your city.” Spartans replied with one word "If"
Mesmeric - adjective - Causing a person to become completely transfixed and unaware of their surroundings. "she found herself staring into his mesmeric gaze"
Eschew - verb - Deliberately avoid using; abstain from. "he appealed to the crowd to eschew violence"
Impudent - adjective - Not showing due respect for another person; impertinent. "he could have strangled this impudent upstart"
Distraught - adjective - Very worried and upset. "a distraught woman sobbed and screamed for help"
Obeisance - noun - Deferential respect. "they paid obeisance to the Prince"
Obeisance - noun - A gesture expressing deferential respect, such as a bow or curtsy. "she made a deep obeisance"
Deference - noun - Polite submission and respect. "he addressed her with the deference due to age"
Decadent - adjective - Characterized by or reflecting a state of moral or cultural decline. "a decaying, decadent Britain"
Imperialism - noun - A policy of extending a country's power and influence through colonization, use of military force, or other means. "the struggle against imperialism"
Dissent - noun - The holding or expression of opinions at variance with those commonly or officially held. "there was no dissent from this view"
Dissent - verb - Hold or express opinions that are at variance with those commonly or officially held. "two members dissented from the majority"
Zenith - noun - The time at which something is most powerful or successful. "in 1977, punk was at its zenith"
Attrition - noun - The process of reducing something's strength or effectiveness through sustained attack or pressure. "the council is trying to wear down the opposition by attrition"
Attrition - noun - Wearing away by friction; abrasion. "the skull shows attrition of the edges of the teeth"
Abdicate - verb - (of a monarch) renounce one's throne. "in 1918 Kaiser Wilhelm abdicated as German emperor"
Abdicate - verb - Fail to fulfil or undertake (a responsibility or duty). "the government was accused of abdicating its responsibility
Pious - adjective - Devoutly religious. "a deeply pious woman"
Pious - adjective - Making or constituting a hypocritical display of virtue. "his pious platitudes"
Pious - adjective - (of a hope) sincere but unlikely to be fulfilled.
Self-denial - noun - The denial of one's own interests and needs; self-sacrifice. "the farm has been built up over the years by hard work and self-denial"
Abjure - verb - Solemnly renounce (a belief, cause, or claim). "MPs were urged to abjure their Jacobite allegiance"
QUOTE: “Everyone is a genius. But if you judge a fish by its ability to climb a tree, it will live its whole life believing that it is stupid.” - Einstein
Brash - adjective - Self-assertive in a rude, noisy, or overbearing way. "he was brash, cocky, and arrogant"
Brash - adjective - Having an ostentatious or tasteless appearance. "the cafe was a brash new building"
Solemnly - adverb - In a formal and dignified manner. "the new Queen was solemnly crowned by the Bishop of Rheims"
Solemnly - adverb - With deep sincerity. "I solemnly swear it will never happen again"
Avuncular - adjective - Kind and friendly towards a younger or less experienced person. "he was avuncular, reassuring, and trustworthy"
Creed - noun - A system of religious belief; a faith. "people of many creeds and cultures"
Creed - noun - A set of beliefs or aims which guide someone's actions. "liberalism was more than a political creed"
Fissure - noun - A long, narrow opening or line of breakage made by cracking or splitting, especially in rock or earth. "the bacteria survive around vents or fissures in the deep ocean floor"
Fissure - noun - A state of incompatibility or disagreement. "a fissure between philosophy and reality"
Bolster - noun - A long, thick pillow that is placed under other pillows for support.
Bolster - verb - Support or strengthen. "the fall in interest rates is starting to bolster confidence"
Bolster - verb - Provide (a seat) with padded support. "I snuggled down into the heavily bolstered seat"
FACT: The Terracotta Army of Qin Shi Huang Zheng in 210–209 BC was made to protect him from demons in the afterlife.
Castrate - verb - Remove the testicles of (a male animal or man).
Misdemeanour - noun - A minor wrongdoing. "the player can expect a suspension for his latest misdemeanour"
Paucity - noun - The presence of something in only small or insufficient quantities or amounts. "a paucity of information"
Magnanimous - adjective - Generous or forgiving, especially towards a rival or less powerful person. "she should be magnanimous in victory"
Insurgent - noun - A person fighting against a government or invading force; a rebel or revolutionary. "an attack by armed insurgents"
Insurgent - adjective - Rising in active revolt. "alleged links with insurgent groups"
Smite - verb - Strike with a firm blow. "he smites the water with his sword"
Smite - noun - A heavy blow or stroke with a weapon or the hand. "the kirk rang with slaps and smites"
Theology - noun - The study of the nature of God and religious belief. "a theology degree"
Proselytize - verb - Convert or attempt to convert (someone) from one religion, belief, or opinion to another. "the programme did have a tremendous evangelical effect, proselytizing many"
Proselytize - verb - Advocate or promote (a belief or course of action). "Davis wanted to share his concept and proselytize his ideas"
Decree - noun - An official order that has the force of law. "the decree guaranteed freedom of assembly
Impel - verb - Drive, force, or urge (someone) to do something. "financial difficulties impelled him to desperate measures"
Disseminate - verb - Spread (something, especially information) widely. "health authorities should foster good practice by disseminating information"
Disseminate - verb - Spread throughout an organ or the body. "disseminated colonic cancer"
Suckle - verb - Feed (a baby or young animal) from the breast or teat. "a mother pig was suckling a huge litter"
FACT: The Tiber is the third-longest river in Italy.
FACT: Early Roman priests attempted to predict the future, watching birds to understand gods will and watching how sacred chickens ate.
Credulity - noun - A tendency to be too ready to believe that something is real or true. "moneylenders prey upon their credulity and inexperience"
Untrammelled - adjective - Not deprived of freedom of action or expression; not restricted or hampered. "a mind untrammelled by convention"
Jostle - verb - Push, elbow, or bump against (someone) roughly, typically in a crowd. "he was jostled by passengers rushing for the gates"
Gerrymander - verb - Manipulate the boundaries of (an electoral constituency) so as to favour one party or class.
Austerity - noun - Sternness or severity of manner or attitude. "he was noted for his austerity and his authoritarianism"
Plunder - verb - Steal goods from (a place or person), typically using force and in a time of war or civil disorder. "looters moved into the disaster area to plunder shops"
Plunder - noun - The violent and dishonest acquisition of property."the commander refused to maintain his troops through pillage and plunder"
Endemic - adjective - (of a disease or condition) regularly found among particular people or in a certain area. "complacency is endemic in industry today"
Endemic - adjective - (of a plant or animal) native or restricted to a certain place. "a marsupial endemic to north-eastern Australia"
Decadence - noun - Moral or cultural decline as characterized by excessive indulgence in pleasure or luxury. "he denounced Western decadence"
Lavish - adjective - Sumptuously rich, elaborate, or luxurious. "a lavish banquet"
Sumptuous - adjective - Splendid and expensive-looking. "the banquet was a sumptuous, luxurious meal"
FACT: The black death or bubonic plague was caused by Yersinia pestis carried by rat fleas killed over 30-60% of Europeans. Pope Clement VI consecrated the Rhone river so corpses could be thrown into it.
Speechify - verb - Deliver a speech, especially in a tedious or pompous way. "the after-dinner speechifying begins"
Tedious - adjective - Too long, slow, or dull; tiresome or monotonous. "a tedious journey"
FACT: Mount Vesuvius located on the Gulf on Naples erupted in AD 79 that led to the burying and destruction of the Roman cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum.
Adroit - adjective - Clever or skilful. "he was adroit at tax avoidance"
Plutocrat - noun - A person whose power derives from their wealth. "champagne-swilling plutocrats"
SAYING: Hindsight is blinding
Burnish - verb - Polish (something, especially metal) by rubbing. "highly burnished armour"
Foible - noun - A minor weakness or eccentricity in someone's character. "they have to tolerate each other's little foibles"
Acute - adjective - (of an unpleasant or unwelcome situation or phenomenon) present or experienced to a severe or intense degree. "an acute housing shortage"
Acute - adjective - Having or showing a perceptive understanding or insight; shrewd. "an acute awareness of changing fashions"
Acute - adjective - (of a disease or its symptoms) severe but of short duration. "acute appendicitis"
Auspicious - adjective - Conducive to success; favourable. "it was not the most auspicious moment to hold an election"
Auspicious - adjective - Giving or being a sign of future success. "they said it was an auspicious moon—it was rising"
Conducive - adjective - Making a certain situation or outcome likely or possible. "the harsh lights and cameras were hardly conducive to a relaxed atmosphere"
Annex - verb - Add as an extra or subordinate part, especially to a document. "the first ten amendments were annexed to the Constitution in 1791"
Annex - verb - Add (territory) to one's own territory by appropriation. "the left bank of the Rhine was annexed by France in 1797"
Subordinate - adjective - Lower in rank or position. "his subordinate officers"
Rigour - noun - The quality of being extremely thorough and careful. "his analysis is lacking in rigour"
Rigour - noun - Severity or strictness. "the full rigour of the law"
Rife - adjective - (especially of something undesirable) of common occurrence; widespread. "male chauvinism was rife in medicine"
Autocracy - noun - A system of government by one person with absolute power.
Ingratiate - verb - Bring oneself into favour with someone by flattering or trying to please them. "a sycophantic attempt to ingratiate herself with the local aristocracy"
Sycophantic - adjective - Behaving or done in an obsequious way in order to gain advantage. "a sycophantic interview"
Obsequious - adjective - Obedient or attentive to an excessive or servile degree. "they were served by obsequious waiters
Embalm - verb - Preserve (a corpse) from decay, originally with spices and now usually by arterial injection of a preservative. "the Egyptian method of embalming"
FACT: Which denotes a place or temple dedicated to the Muses specifically one erected at Alexandria, Egypt by Ptolemy Soter. 
Vivid - adjective - Producing powerful feelings or strong, clear images in the mind. "memories of that evening were still vivid"
Vivid - adjective - (of a colour) intensely deep or bright. "the rhododendron bush provides a vivid splash of mauve"
Chagrin - noun - Annoyance or distress at having failed or been humiliated. "to my chagrin, he was nowhere to be seen"
Infatuate - verb - Be inspired with an intense but short-lived passion or admiration for. "she is infatuated with a handsome police chief
FACT: The Gregorian/Christian Calendar replaced Caeser's calender because of his inaccurate method for calculating a leap year.
Capitulate - verb - Cease to resist an opponent or an unwelcome demand; yield. "the patriots had to capitulate to the enemy forces"
Abase - verb - Behave in a way that belittles or degrades (someone). "I watched my colleagues abasing themselves before the board of trustees"
Repudiate - verb - Refuse to accept; reject. "she has repudiated policies associated with previous party leaders"
Repudiate - verb - Deny the truth or validity of. "the minister repudiated allegations of human rights abuses
Hark - verb - Used to draw attention to someone who has said or done something considered to be foolish or silly. "just hark at you, speaking all lah-de-dah!"
Coalition - noun - A temporary alliance for combined action, especially of political parties forming a government. "a coalition between Liberals and Conservatives"
Ignominy - noun - Public shame or disgrace. "the ignominy of being imprisoned"
Conflation - noun - The merging of two or more sets of information, texts, ideas, etc. into one. "the forceful conflation of two traditions"
Coherent - adjective - (of an argument, theory, or policy) logical and consistent. "they failed to develop a coherent economic strategy"
Coherent - adjective - Forming a unified whole. "the arts could be systematized into one coherent body of knowledge"
Megalomaniac - noun - A person who has an obsessive desire for power.
Meritocracy - noun - Government or the holding of power by people selected according to merit. "progress towards meritocracy was slow"
Grandeur - noun - Splendour and impressiveness, especially of appearance or style. "the majestic grandeur and simplicity of Roman architecture"
Claimant - noun - A person making a claim, especially in a lawsuit or for a state benefit. "one in four eligible claimants failed to register for a rebate"
Rebate - noun - A partial refund to someone who has paid too much for tax, rent, or a utility. "the scheme eases the move to the council tax by giving rebates in the first year"
Sentiment - noun - A view or opinion that is held or expressed. "I agree with your sentiments regarding the road bridge"
Sentiment - noun - Exaggerated and self-indulgent feelings of tenderness, sadness, or nostalgia. "many of the appeals rely on treacly sentiment"
Gentile - adjective - Not Jewish. "a predominantly Gentile audience"
Heresy - noun - Belief or opinion contrary to orthodox religious (especially Christian) doctrine. "Huss was burned for heresy"
Doctrine - noun - A belief or set of beliefs held and taught by a Church, political party, or other group. "the doctrine of predestination"
Repute - verb - Be generally regarded as having done something or as having particular characteristics. "he was reputed to have a fabulous house"
THOUGHT: Diarmaid MacCulloch notes how strange it is that Rome, the city of anti-Christian persecution became the great Christian city, not Bagdad.
THOUGHT: Many movements have been strengthened in their early stages by repression. Christianity, Protestants ect.
Etymology - noun - The study of the origin of words and the way in which their meanings have changed throughout history. "the decline of etymology as a linguistic discipline"
Punitive - adjective - Inflicting or intended as punishment. "he called for punitive measures against the Eastern bloc"
Placate - verb - Make (someone) less angry or hostile. "they attempted to placate the students with promises"
Trenchant - adjective - Vigorous or incisive in expression or style. "the White Paper makes trenchant criticisms of health authorities"
Incisive - adjective - (of a person or mental process) intelligently analytical and clear-thinking. "she was an incisive critic"
Lurid - adjective - Unpleasantly bright in colour, especially so as to create a harsh or unnatural effect. "lurid food colourings"
Lurid - adjective - Presented in vividly shocking or sensational terms. "the more lurid details of the massacre were too frightening for the children"
Laud - verb - FORMAL praise (a person or their achievements) highly. "the obituary lauded him as a great statesman and soldier"
Paragon - noun - A person or thing regarded as a perfect example of a particular quality. "it would have taken a paragon of virtue not to feel viciously jealous"
Paragon - noun - A perfect diamond of 100 carats or more.
Bureaucracy - noun - A system of government in which most of the important decisions are taken by state officials rather than by elected representatives
Bureaucracy - noun - Excessively complicated administrative procedure. "the unnecessary bureaucracy in local government"
Scimitar - noun - A short sword with a curved blade that broadens towards the point, used originally in Eastern countries.
Meticulous - adjective - Showing great attention to detail; very careful and precise. "the designs are hand-glazed with meticulous care"
Delusive - adjective - Giving a false or misleading impression. "a delusive perception of opportunity for all"
Envisage - verb - Contemplate or conceive of as a possibility or a desirable future event. "the Rome Treaty envisaged free movement across frontiers"
Envisage - verb - Form a mental picture of (something not yet existing or known). "he knew what he liked but had difficulty envisaging it"
Insatiable - adjective - (of an appetite or desire) impossible to satisfy. "an insatiable hunger for success"
Nebulous - adjective - (of a concept) vague or ill-defined. "nebulous concepts like quality of life" 
Emblazon - verb - Conspicuously inscribe or display a design on. "T-shirts emblazoned with the names of baseball teams"
Teem - verb - Be full of or swarming with. "every garden is teeming with wildlife"
Shun - verb - Persistently avoid, ignore, or reject (someone or something) through antipathy or caution. "he shunned fashionable society"
Sextant - noun - An instrument with a graduated arc of 60° and a sighting mechanism, used for measuring the angular distances between objects and especially for taking altitudes in navigation and surveying.
Devout - adjective - Having or showing deep religious feeling or commitment. "she was a devout Catholic"
Devout - adjective - Totally committed to a cause or belief. "the most devout environmentalist"
Heresy - noun - Belief or opinion contrary to orthodox religious (especially Christian) doctrine. "Huss was burned for heresy"
Pejorative - adjective - Expressing contempt or disapproval. "permissiveness is used almost universally as a pejorative term"
Pagan - noun - A person holding religious beliefs other than those of the main world religions. "a Muslim majority had to live in close proximity to large communities of Christians and pagans"
Meagre - adjective - (of something provided or available) lacking in quantity or quality. "they were forced to supplement their meagre earnings"
Futile - adjective - Incapable of producing any useful result; pointless. "a futile attempt to keep fans from mounting the stage"
Cordon - noun - A line or circle of police, soldiers, or guards preventing access to or from an area or building. "the crowd was halted in front of the police cordon"
Hone - verb - Sharpen (a blade). "he was carefully honing the curved blade"
Hone - verb - Refine or perfect (something) over a period of time. "some of the best players in the world honed their skills playing street football"
Vagary - noun - An unexpected and inexplicable change in a situation or in someone's behaviour. "the vagaries of the weather"
Austere - adjective - Severe or strict in manner or attitude. "he was an austere man, with a rigidly puritanical outlook"
Austere - adjective - (of living conditions or a way of life) having no comforts or luxuries. "conditions in the prison could hardly be more austere"
Puritanical - adjective - Having or displaying a very strict or censorious moral attitude towards self-indulgence or sex. "his puritanical parents saw any kind of pleasure as the road to damnation"
Uncouth - adjective - Lacking good manners, refinement, or grace. "he is unwashed, uncouth, and drunk most of the time"
Mongrel - noun - A dog of no definable type or breed. "she's a particularly intelligent mongrel with a lot of collie in her"
Mongrel - noun - OFFENSIVE Person of mixed descent. "she was a mongrel, only half French"
Cataract - noun - A large waterfall. "the river descends in a succession of spectacular cataracts"
Cataract - noun - A medical condition in which the lens of the eye becomes progressively opaque, resulting in blurred vision. "she had cataracts in both eyes"You think you can get away with saying shit to me over the internet?
Prowess - noun - Skill or expertise in a particular activity or field. "his prowess as a fisherman"
Prowess - noun - Bravery in battle. "the hereditary nobility had no monopoly of skill and prowess in war"
Ravening - adjective - (of a ferocious wild animal) extremely hungry and hunting for prey. "they turned on each other like ravening wolves"
QUOTE: "From the fury of the Northmen deliver us, O Lord." The british referencing The Vikings in fear.
Chronology - noun - The arrangement of events or dates in the order of their occurrence. "the novel abandons the conventions of normal chronology"
FACT: Kiev is the capital of Ukraine.
Apocryphal - adjective - (of a story or statement) of doubtful authenticity, although widely circulated as being true. "an apocryphal story about a former president"
Momentous - adjective - Of great importance or significance, especially in having a bearing on future events. "a period of momentous changes in East–West relations"
Assimilation - noun - The process of taking in and fully understanding information or ideas. "the assimilation of the knowledge of the Greeks"
Assimilation - noun - The absorption and digestion of food or nutrients by the body or any biological system. "nitrate assimilation usually takes place in leaves"
Assimilate - verb - Take in and understand fully (information or ideas). "Marie tried to assimilate the week's events"
Spectre - noun - A ghost. "a dread of spectres and witches affected every aspect of daily life"
Spectre - noun - Something widely feared as a possible unpleasant or dangerous occurrence. "the spectre of nuclear holocaust"
Desiccate - verb - Remove the moisture from (something), typically in order to preserve it. "desiccated coconut"
Desiccate - verb - Lacking interest, passion, or energy. "a desiccated history of ideas"
QUOTE: “If you are depressed you are living in the past. If you are anxious you are living in the future. If you are at peace you are living in the present.” - Lao Tzu
Millet - noun - A cereal grown in warm countries and regions with poor soils, bearing a large crop of small seeds which are chiefly used to make flour.
Perpetual - adjective - Never ending or changing. "deep caves in perpetual darkness"
Perpetual - adjective - Occurring repeatedly; so frequent as to seem endless and uninterrupted. "their perpetual money worries"
Animism - noun - The attribution of a living soul to plants, inanimate objects, and natural phenomena. 
Animism - noun - The belief in a supernatural power that organizes and animates the material universe. "beneath the veneer of Hindu religion, ancient animism runs strong"
Veneer - noun - A thin decorative covering of fine wood applied to a coarser wood or other material. "a fine-grained veneer"
Veneer - noun - An attractive appearance that covers or disguises someone or something's true nature or feelings. "her veneer of composure cracked a little"
Swathe - noun - A broad strip or area of something. "vast swathes of countryside"
Swathe - noun - A row or line of grass, corn, or other crop as it falls or lies when mown or reaped. "if the day is windy, the swathes should be high and narrow"
Nomad - noun - A member of a people that travels from place to place to find fresh pasture for its animals and has no permanent home. "the withering of their grasslands forced the nomads of the Sahara to descend into the Nile valley"
Antithesis - noun - A person or thing that is the direct opposite of someone or something else. "love is the antithesis of selfishness"
Marauding - adjective - Going about in search of things to steal or people to attack. "marauding gangs of youths"
Spoor - noun - The track or scent of an animal. "they searched around the hut for a spoor"
Teem - verb - Be full of or swarming with. "every garden is teeming with wildlife"
Alpine style refers to mountaineering in a self-sufficient manner, carrying all of one's food, shelter, equipment, etc.  Additionally, means the refusal of fixed ropes, high-altitude porters and the use of supplemental oxygen.
Accolade - noun - An award or privilege granted as a special honour or as an acknowledgement of merit. "the hotel has won numerous accolades"
Accolade - noun - A touch on a person's shoulders with a sword at the bestowing of a knighthood.
Singularity - noun - A hypothetical moment in time when artificial intelligence and other technologies have become so advanced that humanity undergoes a dramatic and irreversible change.
FACT: It is said, Gengis Khan or Temujin and his brothers were given 5 arrows an arrow each by their mother and told to break it. They did. She bundled 5 arrows together and told them to break it. They could not. From unity, strength.
Forage - verb - (of a person or animal) search widely for food or provisions. "the birds forage for aquatic invertebrates, insects, and seeds"
Feat - noun - An achievement that requires great courage, skill, or strength. "the new printing presses were considerable feats of engineering"
Accede - verb - Agree to a demand, request, or treaty. "the authorities did not accede to the strikers' demands"
Longevity - noun - Long life. "the greater longevity of women compared with men"
Longevity - noun - Long existence or service. "her longevity in office now appeared as a handicap to the party"
Ascribe - verb - Regard something as being due to (a cause). "he ascribed Jane's short temper to her upset stomach"
Sanctity - noun - The state or quality of being holy, sacred, or saintly. "the site of the tomb was a place of sanctity for the ancient Egyptians"
Proficient - adjective - Competent or skilled in doing or using something. "I was proficient at my job"
Equestrian - adjective - Relating to horse riding. "his amazing equestrian skills"
Hearsay - noun - Information received from other people which cannot be substantiated; rumour. "according to hearsay, Bez had managed to break his arm"
Substantiate - verb - Provide evidence to support or prove the truth of. "they had found nothing to substantiate the allegations"
Immolate - verb - Kill or offer as a sacrifice, especially by burning. "Chinese kings would immolate vast numbers of animals"
Coincide - verb - Occur at the same time. "publication is timed to coincide with a major exhibition"
Patron - noun - A person who gives financial or other support to a person, organization, or cause. "a celebrated patron of the arts"
Patron - noun - A customer of a shop, restaurant, etc., especially a regular one. "we surveyed the plushness of the hotel and its sleek, well-dressed patrons"
Exacerbate - verb - Make (a problem, bad situation, or negative feeling) worse. "the exorbitant cost of land in urban areas only exacerbated the problem"
Populous - adjective - Having a large population; densely populated. "the populous city of Shanghai"
Insignia - noun - A distinguishing badge or emblem of military rank, office, or membership of an organization. "a khaki uniform with colonel's insignia on the collar"
Monotonous - adjective - Dull, tedious, and repetitious; lacking in variety and interest. "the statistics that he quotes with monotonous regularity"
Fratricide - noun - The killing of one's brother or sister. "Cain justifies his fratricide with lethal logic"
Fratricide - noun - The accidental killing of one's own forces in war. "the Vietnam War saw fratricide increase because of the close-in jungle fighting"
Endow - verb - Give or bequeath an income or property to (a person or institution). "he endowed the Church with lands"
Saturate - verb - Cause (something) to become thoroughly soaked with water or other liquid so that no more can be absorbed. "the soil is saturated"
Fervour - noun - Intense and passionate feeling. "he talked with all the fervour of a new convert"
Consecrate - verb - Make or declare (something, typically a church) sacred; dedicate formally to a religious purpose. "the present Holy Trinity church was consecrated in 1845"
Abhor - verb - Regard with disgust and hatred. "he abhorred sexism in every form"
Veer - verb - Change direction suddenly. "an oil tanker that had veered off course"
Murky - adjective - Dark and gloomy, especially due to thick mist. "the sky was murky and a thin drizzle was falling"
Murky - adjective - Obscure or morally questionable. "a government minister with a murky past"
Lucid - adjective - Expressed clearly; easy to understand. "a lucid account"
Lucid - adjective - Showing or having the ability to think clearly, especially in intervals between periods of confusion or insanity. "he has a few lucid moments every now and then"
Eunuch - noun - A man who has been castrated, especially (in the past) one employed to guard the women's living areas at an oriental court.
Analogous - adjective - Comparable in certain respects, typically in a way which makes clearer the nature of the things compared. "they saw the relationship between a ruler and his subjects as analogous to that of father and children"
Unassailable - adjective - Unable to be attacked, questioned, or defeated. "an unassailable lead"
Burly - adjective - (of a person) large and strong; heavily built. "I saw a burly figure approaching"
Regent - noun - A person appointed to administer a state because the monarch is a minor or is absent or incapacitated.
Sodomite - noun - A person who engages in anal intercourse.
Precocious - adjective - (of a child) having developed certain abilities or inclinations at an earlier age than is usual or expected. "a precocious, solitary boy"
Precocious - adjective - (of behaviour or ability) having developed at an earlier age than is usual or expected. "a precocious talent for computing"
Precocious - adjective - (of a plant) flowering or fruiting earlier than usual.
Fresco - noun - A painting done rapidly in watercolour on wet plaster on a wall or ceiling, so that the colours penetrate the plaster and become fixed as it dries.
FACT: Vitruvian Man is Leonardo da Vinci's own reflection on human proportion and architecture, made clear through words and image. Bringing together ideas about art, architecture, human anatomy and symmetry in one distinct image.
Precursor - noun - A person or thing that comes before another of the same kind; a forerunner. "a three-stringed precursor of the violin".
Secede - verb - Withdraw formally from membership of a federal union, an alliance, or a political or religious organization. "the kingdom of Belgium seceded from the Netherlands in 1830"
Influx - noun - An arrival or entry of large numbers of people or things. "a massive influx of tourists"
Transient - adjective - Lasting only for a short time; impermanent. "a transient cold spell"
Elicit - verb - Evoke or draw out (a reaction, answer, or fact) from someone. "I tried to elicit a smile from Joanna"
Destitution - noun - Poverty so extreme that one lacks the means to provide for oneself. "the family faced eviction and destitution"
Ossify - verb - Turn into bone or bony tissue. "these tracheal cartilages may ossify"
Ossify - verb - Cease developing; stagnate. "ossified political institutions"
Voluble - adjective - (of a person) talking fluently, readily, or incessantly. "she was as voluble as her husband was silent"
Eloquent - adjective - Fluent or persuasive in speaking or writing. "an eloquent speech"
Eloquent - adjective - Clearly expressing or indicating something. "the bus journey alone is eloquent of class inequality"
FACT: Nicolaus Copernicus mathematician and astronomer who formulated a model of the universe that placed the Sun rather than the Earth at the center of the universe.
Exhume - verb - Dig out (something buried, especially a corpse) from the ground. "the bodies were exhumed on the orders of a judge"
Bequeath - verb - Leave (property) to a person or other beneficiary by a will. "he bequeathed his art collection to the town"
Bequeath - verb - Pass (something) on or leave (something) to someone else. "he ditched the unpopular policies bequeathed to him"
FACT: Edo is the former name of Tokyo, the capital of Japan.
QUOTE: "If we abandon Aristotle, who will be our guide in philosophy!", "Only the blind need a guide," was his reply. "Those with eyes and those with a mind must use these faculties to discern for themselves." - Galileo.
FACT: Giordano Bruno argued the sun was a star and an infinite universe. "Tongue imprisoned because of his wicked words", in 1600 he had a steel spike pierced through his tongue, he was hung upside down and was burned at the stake.
Maelstrom - noun - A powerful whirlpool in the sea or a river. "we headed south, with one eye on the maelstrom to starboard"
Turmoil - noun - A state of great disturbance, confusion, or uncertainty. "the country was in turmoil"
Turmoil - noun - A situation or state of confused movement or violent turmoil. "the train station was a maelstrom of crowds"
Erratic - adjective - Not even or regular in pattern or movement; unpredictable. "her breathing was erratic"
Middling - adjective - Moderate or average in size, amount, or rank. "people on middling incomes"
Quiescent - adjective - In a state or period of inactivity or dormancy. "strikes were headed by groups of workers who had previously been quiescent"
Aberration - noun - A departure from what is normal, usual, or expected, typically an unwelcome one. "they described the outbreak of violence in the area as an aberration"
Quell - verb - Put an end to (a rebellion or other disorder), typically by the use of force. "extra police were called to quell the disturbance"
Quell - verb - Subdue or silence (someone). "Connor quelled him with a look"
Quell - verb - Suppress (a feeling). "she quelled an urge to race up the stairs"
Renegade - noun - A person who deserts and betrays an organization, country, or set of principles. "an agent who later turns out to be a renegade"
Renegade - adjective - Having treacherously changed allegiance. "a renegade bodyguard"
Abject - adjective - (of something bad) experienced or present to the maximum degree. "his letter plunged her into abject misery"
Plight - noun - A dangerous, difficult, or otherwise unfortunate situation. "we must direct our efforts towards relieving the plight of children living in poverty"
Heliocentric - adjective - Having or representing the sun as the centre, as in the accepted astronomical model of the solar system.
Idiosyncrasy - noun - A mode of behaviour or way of thought peculiar to an individual. "one of his little idiosyncrasies was always preferring to be in the car first"
Extrapolate - verb - Extend the application of (a method or conclusion) to an unknown situation by assuming that existing trends will continue or similar methods will be applicable. "the results cannot be extrapolated to other patient groups"
Contemporaneous - adjective - Existing at or occurring in the same period of time. "Pythagoras was contemporaneous with Buddha"
Suffice - verb - Be enough or adequate. "a quick look should suffice"
FACT: Taj Mahal was commissioned by Shah Jahan in 1631, to be built in the memory of his wife Mumtaz Mahal. It is in Agra, India.
Opulence - noun - Great wealth or luxuriousness. "rooms of spectacular opulence"
Insolent - adjective - Showing a rude and arrogant lack of respect. "she hated the insolent tone of his voice"
The Hope Diamond is one of the most famous jewels in the world, with ownership records dating back almost four centuries.
Folly - noun - Lack of good sense; foolishness. "an act of sheer folly"
Inoculate - verb - Treat with a vaccine to produce immunity against a disease; vaccinate. "he inoculated his tenants against smallpox"
Virtuoso - noun - A person highly skilled in music or another artistic pursuit. "a celebrated clarinet virtuoso"
Deism - noun - Belief in the existence of a supreme being, specifically of a creator who does not intervene in the universe.
Preside - verb - Be in the position of authority in a meeting or other gathering. "the prime minister will preside at an emergency cabinet meeting"
Goad - verb - Provoke or annoy (someone) so as to stimulate an action or reaction. "he was trying to goad her into a fight"
Hinterland - noun - The remote areas of a country away from the coast or the banks of major rivers. "the hinterland of southern Italy"
Melange - noun - A varied mixture. "a melange of tender vegetables and herbs"
Superfluous - adjective - Unnecessary, especially through being more than enough. "the purchaser should avoid asking for superfluous information"
Rancid - adjective - (of foods containing fat or oil) smelling or tasting unpleasant as a result of being old and stale. "rancid meat"
Rancid - adjective - Highly unpleasant; repugnant. "his columns are just rationales for every kind of rancid prejudice"
FACT: The art of surfing was first discovered by Joseph Banks on the HMS Endeavour during the first voyage of James Cook, during the ship's stay in Tahiti.
Balmy - adjective - Characterized by pleasantly warm weather. "the balmy days of late summer"
Gruelling - adjective - Extremely tiring and demanding. "a gruelling schedule"
Harangue - noun - A lengthy and aggressive speech. "they were subjected to a ten-minute harangue by two border guards"
Conciliate - verb - Stop (someone) being angry or discontented; placate. "concessions were made to conciliate the peasantry"
Amity - noun - FORMAL Friendly relations. "the presence of French troops in Scotland had produced hostility rather than amity"
Manacle - noun - One of two metal bands joined by a chain, for fastening a person's hands or ankles. "the practice of keeping prisoners in manacles"
Inalienable - adjective - Not subject to being taken away from or given away by the possessor. "the shareholders have the inalienable right to dismiss directors"
Hamstring - verb - Cripple (a person or animal) by cutting their hamstrings.
Hamstring - verb - Severely restrict the efficiency or effectiveness of. "we were hamstrung by a total lack of knowledge"
Enrapture - verb - Give intense pleasure or joy to. "Ruth was enraptured by the sleeping child"
Rapture - noun - A feeling of intense pleasure or joy. "Leonora listened with rapture"
Rapture - noun - (according to some millenarian teaching) transport (a believer) from earth to heaven at the Second Coming of Christ. "people will be raptured out of automobiles as they are driving along"
Tenacity - noun - The quality or fact of being able to grip something firmly; grip. "the sheer tenacity of the limpet"
Tenacity - noun - The quality or fact of being very determined; determination. "you have to admire the tenacity of these two guys"
Tenacity - noun - The quality or fact of continuing to exist; persistence. "the tenacity of certain myths within the historical record"
Deride - verb - Express contempt for; ridicule. "the decision was derided by environmentalists"
Soar - verb - Fly or rise high in the air. "the bird spread its wings and soared into the air"
Soar - verb - Increase rapidly above the usual level. "the cost of living continued to soar"
Malleable - adjective - (of a metal or other material) able to be hammered or pressed into shape without breaking or cracking. "a malleable metal can be beaten into a sheet"
Malleable - adjective - Easily influenced; pliable. "they are as malleable and easily led as sheep"
FACT: Jethro Tull (1664 – 1741) was an agricultural pioneer and the inventor of the seed drill, the horse drawn hoe, and an improved plough, all major developments in the 18th century agricultural revolution.
Galling - adjective - Causing annoyance or resentment; annoying. "it would be galling to lose your job because of a dispute with a customer"
Tumbril - noun - HISTORICAL An open cart that tilted backwards to empty out its load, in particular one used to convey condemned prisoners to the guillotine during the French Revolution.
Inveigh - verb - Speak or write about (something) with great hostility. "he liked to inveigh against all forms of academic training"
Seethe - verb - (of a liquid) boil or be turbulent as if boiling. "the grey ocean seethed"
Seethe - verb - (of a person) be filled with intense but unexpressed anger. "inwardly he was seething at the slight to his authority"
Beset - verb - (of a problem or difficulty) trouble (someone or something) persistently. "the social problems that beset the UK"
Unsightly - adjective - Unpleasant to look at; ugly. "an unsightly rubbish tip"
Brisk - adjective - Active and energetic. "a good brisk walk"
Brisk - adjective - (of wind or the weather) cold but pleasantly invigorating. "the sea was shimmering and heaving beneath the brisk breeze"
Brisk - adjective - Showing a wish to deal with things quickly; slightly brusque. "she adopted a brisk, businesslike tone"
Frenzy - noun - A state or period of uncontrolled excitement or wild behaviour. "Doreen worked herself into a frenzy of rage"
Prosaic - adjective - Having or using the style or diction of prose as opposed to poetry; lacking imaginativeness or originality. "prosaic language can't convey the experience"
Inimical - adjective - Tending to obstruct or harm. "the policy was inimical to Britain's real interests"
Upheaval - noun - A violent or sudden change or disruption to something. "major upheavals in the financial markets"
Upheaval - noun - An upward displacement of part of the earth's crust. "the first upheaval produced a hill which was called Roof Mountain"
Avert - verb - Turn away (one's eyes or thoughts). "she averted her eyes while we made stilted conversation"
Avert - verb - Prevent or ward off (an undesirable occurrence). "talks failed to avert a rail strike"
Volatile - adjective - (of a substance) easily evaporated at normal temperatures. "volatile solvents such as petroleum ether, hexane, and benzene"
Volatile - adjective - Liable to change rapidly and unpredictably, especially for the worse. "the political situation was becoming more volatile"
Interlude - noun - An intervening period of time; an interval. "enjoying a lunchtime interlude"
Dither - verb - Be indecisive. "I can't bear people who dither"
Parley - noun - A conference between opposing sides in a dispute, especially a discussion of terms for an armistice. "a parley is in progress and the invaders may withdraw"
Recede - verb - Go or move back or further away from a previous position. "the floodwaters had receded"
Recede - verb - (of a quality, feeling, or possibility) gradually diminish. "the prospects of an early end to the war receded"
Stymie - verb - Prevent or hinder the progress of. "the changes must not be allowed to stymie new medical treatments"
Metropolis - noun - A very large and busy city. "by the late eighteenth century Edo had grown to a metropolis with a population of nearly one million"
Reprieve - verb - Cancel or postpone the punishment of (someone, especially someone condemned to death). "under the new regime, prisoners under sentence of death were reprieved"
Chironex fleckeri, commonly known as the sea wasp, is a species of highly venomous box jellyfish found in coastal waters from northern Australia and New Guinea north to the Philippines and Vietnam.
FACT: The Lunar Society of Birmingham was a dinner club and informal learned society of prominent figures, including industrialists, natural philosophers and intellectuals that met regularly between 1765 and 1813.
FACT: One of The Lunar Society members was Erasmus Darwin, grandfather of Charles Darwin.
Breadth - noun - The distance or measurement from side to side of something; width. "the boat measured 27 feet in breadth"
Breadth - noun - Wide range or extent. "she has the advantage of breadth of experience"
Chic - adjective - Elegantly and stylishly fashionable. "she looked every inch the chic Frenchwoman"
Guerrilla warfare - noun - Engagement in or the activities involved in a war fought by small groups of irregular soldiers against typically larger regular forces.
Pariah - noun - An outcast. "they were treated as social pariahs"
FACT: The word 'vaccine' late 18th century, comes from Latin vaccinus, from vacca ‘cow’ (because of the early use of the cowpox virus against smallpox) discovered by Edward Jenner.
QUOTE: "Nature will not, nor cannot be, defeated in her purposes...The necessary mortality must come, in some form or another" - Thomas Malthus on Edward Jenner's vaccine solution to smallpox.
Desolate - adjective - (of a place) uninhabited and giving an impression of bleak emptiness. "a desolate Pennine moor"
FACT: It's estimated that before the 17th century, no developed country could feed themselves farmers without 4/5 of people working as farmers.
Wearisome - adjective - Causing one to feel tired or bored. "they have schedules and inventories that tell them in wearisome detail what they should look for"
Accrue - verb - (of a benefit or sum of money) be received by someone in regular or increasing amounts over time. "financial benefits will accrue from restructuring"
Accrue - verb - Accumulate or receive (payments or benefits) over time. "they accrue entitlements to holiday pay"
Rhetoric - noun - The art of effective or persuasive speaking or writing, especially the exploitation of figures of speech and other compositional techniques. "he is using a common figure of rhetoric, hyperbole"
FACT: Gas lighting was so important in early industrial city life, safer and longer days got a major boost in Britain because of the massive accumulation of unwanted mustkets after Napoleon's defeat in 1815. These were turned into gas pipes.
Zest - noun - Great enthusiasm and energy. "they campaigned with zest and intelligence"
Zest - noun - The outer coloured part of the peel of citrus fruit, used as flavouring. "add 3 tablespoons of lemon zest"
Prestige - noun - Widespread respect and admiration felt for someone or something on the basis of a perception of their achievements or quality. "the firm has recently gained considerable prestige"
Hefty - adjective - Large and heavy. "a hefty young chap"
Hefty - adjective - Done with vigour or force. "he aimed a hefty kick at the door"
THOUGHT: Popcorn is sold in cinema because its cheap, appetizing, made instantly and has, approximately, a 2500% profit margin.
Coup - noun - A sudden, violent, and illegal seizure of power from a government. "he was overthrown in an army coup"
Imbibe - verb - Drink (alcohol). "they were imbibing far too many pitchers of beer"
Imbibe - verb - Absorb or assimilate (ideas or knowledge). "if one does not imbibe the culture one cannot succeed"
Ruse - noun- An action intended to deceive someone; a trick. "Emma tried to think of a ruse to get Paul out of the house"
Illegible - adjective - Not clear enough to be read. "his handwriting is totally illegible"
Bemoan - verb - Express discontent or sorrow over (something). "it was no use bemoaning her lot"
Proletariat - noun - Working-class people regarded collectively (often used with reference to Marxism). "the growth of the industrial proletariat"
Intersperse - verb - Scatter among or between other things; place here and there. "deep pools interspersed by shallow shingle banks"
Intersperse - verb - Diversify (a thing or things) with other things at intervals. "the debate was interspersed with angry exchanges"
Brash - adjective - Having an ostentatious or tasteless appearance. "the cafe was a brash new building"
Ostentatious - adjective - Characterized by pretentious or showy display; designed to impress. "a simple design that is glamorous without being ostentatious"
Egomaniac - noun - A person who is obsessively egotistical or self-centred. "he is a raving egomaniac"
Leathery - adjective - Having a tough, hard texture like leather. "brown, leathery skin"
FACT: The Emancipation Proclamation, was a presidential proclamation & executive order issued by Abraham Lincoln on January 1, 1863. It changed the legal status of more than 3 million enslaved people in the designated areas of the South from slave to free.
FACT: My American Cousin was the play U.S. President Abraham Lincoln was attending in Ford's Theatre when he was assassinated by actor and Confederate sympathizer John Wilkes Booth on April 14, 1865.
Presentiment - noun - An intuitive feeling about the future, especially one of foreboding. "a presentiment of disaster"
FACT: John Wilkes Booth was armed with a dagger and a single shot Derringer pistol.
FACT: Brutus took a leading role in the assassination of Julius Caesar. 
Fervent - adjective - Having or displaying a passionate intensity. "a fervent supporter of the revolution"
QUOTE: "My paramount objective in this struggle is to save the Union, and it is neither to save or destroy slavery. If I could save the Union without freeing any slave I would do it" - Abraham Lincoln.
Vice - noun - Immoral or wicked behaviour. "an open sewer of vice and crime"
Vice - noun - Criminal activities involving prostitution, pornography, or drugs. "a mobile phone network is being used to peddle vice"
Vice - noun - An immoral or wicked personal characteristic. "hypocrisy is a particularly sinister vice"
FACT: Both George Washington and Thomas Jefferson owned slaves.
FACT: In 1845, the Republic of Texas was annexed to the United States of America, becoming the 28th U.S. state.
Paltry - adjective - (of an amount) very small or meagre. "she would earn a paltry £33 more a month"
Paltry - adjective - petty; trivial. "naval glory struck him as paltry"
Anathema - noun - Something or someone that one vehemently dislikes. "racial hatred was anathema to her"
Pernicious - adjective - Having a harmful effect, especially in a gradual or subtle way. "the pernicious influences of the mass media"
Ignominious - adjective - Deserving or causing public disgrace or shame. "no other party risked ignominious defeat"
Illusory - adjective - Based on illusion; not real. "she knew the safety of her room was illusory"
Delegate - noun - A person sent or authorized to represent others, in particular an elected representative sent to a conference. "congress delegates rejected the proposals"
Delegate - verb - Entrust (a task or responsibility) to another person, typically one who is less senior than oneself. "she must delegate duties so as to free herself for more important tasks"
Shrill - adjective - (of a voice or sound) high-pitched and piercing. "a shrill laugh"
Posthumous - adjective - Occurring, awarded, or appearing after the death of the originator. "he was awarded a posthumous Military Cross"
Concentric - adjective - Of or denoting circles, arcs, or other shapes which share the same centre, the larger often completely surrounding the smaller. "concentric circles indicate distances of 1 km, 2 km, and 3 km from the centre"
Earnest - adjective - Resulting from or showing sincere and intense conviction. "an earnest student"
Enmesh - verb - Cause to become entangled in something. "whales enmeshed in drift nets"
Stipend - noun - A fixed regular sum paid as a salary or as expenses to a clergyman, teacher, or public official.
Rapacity - noun - Aggressive greed. "the rapacity of landowners seeking greater profit from their property"
Vestige - noun - A trace or remnant of something that is disappearing or no longer exists. "the last vestiges of colonialism"
Circumspection - noun - The quality of being wary and unwilling to take risks; prudence. "circumspection is required in the day-to-day exercise of administrative powers"
Prudent - adjective - Acting with or showing care and thought for the future. "no prudent money manager would authorize a loan without first knowing its purpose"
Gangling - adjective - (of a person) tall, thin, and awkward in movements or bearing. "a gangling youth with a trace of down on his cheeks"
Spurn - verb - Reject with disdain or contempt. "he spoke gruffly, as if afraid that his invitation would be spurned"
Pneumatic - adjective - Containing or operated by air or gas under pressure. "the machines with pneumatic loading are more efficient"
FACT: Opium comes from white poppy seeds.
Surreptitious - adjective - Kept secret, especially because it would not be approved of. "low wages were supplemented by surreptitious payments from tradesmen"
Debilitate - verb - Make (someone) very weak and infirm. "he was severely debilitated by a stomach upset"
Brusque - adjective - Abrupt or offhand in speech or manner. "she could be brusque and impatient"
Stern - adjective - (of a person or their manner) serious and unrelenting, especially in the assertion of authority and exercise of discipline. "a smile transformed his stern face"
Stern - adjective - (of an act or statement) strict and severe. "stern measures to restrict vehicle growth"
Iniquity - noun - Immoral or grossly unfair behaviour. "a den of iniquity"
Unpalatable - adjective - Not pleasant to taste. "scraps of unpalatable food"
Unpalatable - adjective - Difficult to put up with or accept. "the unpalatable fact that many of the world's people are starving"
Indignation - noun - Anger or annoyance provoked by what is perceived as unfair treatment. "the letter filled Lucy with indignation"
Craven - adjective - Contemptibly lacking in courage; cowardly. "a craven abdication of his moral duty"
Militia - noun - A military force that is raised from the civil population to supplement a regular army in an emergency. "creating a militia was no answer to the army's manpower problem"
Grisly - adjective - Causing horror or disgust. "the town was shaken by a series of grisly crimes"
Derision - noun - Contemptuous ridicule or mockery. "my stories were greeted with derision and disbelief"
Foment - verb - Instigate or stir up (an undesirable or violent sentiment or course of action). "they accused him of fomenting political unrest"
Privy - adjective - Sharing in the knowledge of (something secret or private). "he was no longer privy to her innermost thoughts"
Affable - adjective - Friendly, good-natured, or easy to talk to. "an affable and agreeable companion"
FACT: Mao, biggest mass murder in history. Mao Zedong: Estimated death count — 49-78 million (1949-1976), Joseph Stalin: Estimated death count — 23 million (1925-1953), Adolf Hitler: Estimated death count — 17 million (1933-1945).
Myopia, or nearsightedness, is a refractive error, which means that the eye does not bend or refract light properly to a single focus to see images clearly.
Tenuous - adjective - Very weak or slight. "the tenuous link between interest rates and investment"
Dire - adjective - Extremely serious or urgent. "misuse of drugs can have dire consequences"
Grandeur - noun - Splendour and impressiveness, especially of appearance or style. "the majestic grandeur and simplicity of Roman architecture"
Guile - noun - Sly or cunning intelligence. "he used all his guile and guts to free himself from the muddle he was in"
FACT: Mein Kampf (My Struggle) is a 1925 autobiographical book by Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler. The work describes the process by which Hitler became antisemitic and outlines his political ideology and future plans for Germany.
Profligacy - noun - Reckless extravagance or wastefulness in the use of resources. "the government returned to fiscal profligacy"
Adulation - noun - Excessive admiration or praise. "he found it difficult to cope with the adulation of the fans"
Lewd - adjective - Crude and offensive in a sexual way. "she began to gyrate to the music and sing a lewd song"
FACT: Crocodile was used for contraception, Crocodile dung is actually slightly alkaline, like modern-day spermicides, so it could have worked.
Pallid - adjective - (of a person's face) pale, typically because of poor health. "his face, with its wrinkled, pallid complexion"
Pallid - adjective - Lacking vigour or intensity; insipid. "a pallid ray of winter sun"
FACT: The National Socialist German Workers' Party commonly referred to in English as the Nazi Party was a far-right political party in Germany that was active between 1920 and 1945 and practiced the ideology of Nazism.
Impetus - noun - The force or energy with which a body moves. "hit the booster coil before the flywheel loses all its impetus"
FACT: On the 30th of January 1933, Hitler was named chancellor.
FACT: The Wall Street Crash of 1929, also known as Black Tuesday(October 29), was the most devastating stock market crash in the history of the US (acting as the most significant predicting indicator of the Great Depression).
Amalgamation - noun - The action, process, or result of combining or uniting. "the threat of amalgamation with another college"
FACT: Prohibition in the United States was a nationwide constitutional ban on the production, importation, transportation, and sale of alcoholic beverages from 1920 to 1933.
Imperious - adjective - Arrogant and domineering. "his imperious demands"
Domineer - verb - Assert one's will over another in an arrogant way. "Cathy had been a martyr to her gruff, domineering husband"
Serendipity - noun - The occurrence and development of events by chance in a happy or beneficial way. "a fortunate stroke of serendipity"
Perverse - adjective - Showing a deliberate and obstinate desire to behave in a way that is unreasonable or unacceptable. "Kate's perverse decision not to cooperate held good"
Perverse - adjective - Contrary to the accepted or expected standard or practice. "in two general elections the outcome was quite perverse"
Depredation - noun - An act of attacking or plundering. "protecting grain from the depredations of rats and mice"
Prevaricate - verb - Speak or act in an evasive way. "he seemed to prevaricate when journalists asked pointed questions"
FACT: It is thought that more Russian soldeirs were killed by their own officers for cowardice or desertion then all British soldiers killed in WW2.
Scuttle - noun - A metal container with a handle, used to fetch and store coal for a domestic fire.
FACT: The Manhattan Project led by Julius Robert Oppenheimer developing 4 bombs. First, "The Gadget" in the Trinity test in New Mexico, "Little Boy" dropped on Hiroshima, "Fatman" dropped on Nagasaki and a fourth that was never used.
FACT: Aldolf Hitler killed himself by gunshot on 30 April 1945 in his Führerbunker in Berlin. Eva Braun, his wife of one day, committed suicide with him by taking cyanide.
QUOTE: “Now I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds” - Julius Robert Oppenhiemer, as he witnessed the first detonation of a nuclear weapon on July 16, 1945, this piece of Hindu scripture ran through his mind.
Ambivalent - adjective - Having mixed feelings or contradictory ideas about something or someone. "some loved her, some hated her, few were ambivalent about her"
Maim - verb - Wound or injure (a person or animal) so that part of the body is permanently damaged. "100,000 soldiers were killed or maimed"
Gambit - noun - An act or remark that is calculated to gain an advantage, especially at the outset of a situation. "his resignation was a tactical gambit"
Gambit - noun - (in chess) an opening move in which a player makes a sacrifice, typically of a pawn, for the sake of a compensating advantage. "he tried the dubious Budapest gambit"
Ascetic - adjective - Characterized by severe self-discipline and abstention from all forms of indulgence, typically for religious reasons. "an ascetic life of prayer, fasting, and manual labour"
QUOTE: "If I need only one shirt to cover myself with but use two, I am guilty of stealing one from another. If five bananas are enough to keep me going, my eating a sixth one is a form of theft." - Mahatma Gandhi.
QUOTE: "All you have to do is shoot Gandhi. You will be surprised how quickly the trouble will die down." - Aldolf Hitler on Britain.
Lurch - verb - Make an abrupt, unsteady, uncontrolled movement or series of movements; stagger. "the car lurched forward"
Stricture - noun - A restriction on a person or activity. "the strictures imposed by the British Board of Film Censors"
Stricture - noun - A sternly critical or censorious remark or instruction. "his strictures on their lack of civic virtue"
FACT: Pakistan is an acronym, for Punjab, Afghan (the North-West frontier region), Kashmir, Indus (some say it's for Islam) and Sind. The "Tan" is said to represent Baluchistan.
FACT: Mahatma Gandhi was assassinated on 30 January 1948 because Hindu extremists regarded him as a traitor.
Reprisal - noun - An act of retaliation. "three youths died in the reprisals which followed"
Mordant - adjective - (especially of humour) having or showing a sharp or critical quality; biting. "a mordant sense of humour"
Vaunt - verb - Boast about or praise (something), especially excessively. "the much vaunted information superhighway"
Enmity - noun - A state or feeling of active opposition or hostility. "decades of enmity between the two countries"
De facto - adjective - Existing or holding a specified position in fact but not necessarily by legal right. "a de facto one-party system"
Proclamation - noun - A public or official announcement dealing with a matter of great importance. "the issuing by the monarch of a proclamation dissolving Parliament"
Diminutive - adjective - Extremely or unusually small. "a diminutive figure dressed in black"
Gulag - noun - A system of labour camps maintained in the Soviet Union from 1930 to 1955 in which many people died.
Subservient - adjective - Prepared to obey others unquestioningly. "she was subservient to her parents"
Subservient - adjective - Less important; subordinate. "1he expected her career to become subservient to his"
Subservient - adjective - Serving as a means to an end. "the whole narration is subservient to the moral plan of exemplifying twelve virtues in twelve knights"
Scabrous - adjective - Rough and covered with, or as if with, scabs. "his face was scabrous and lumpy"
Salacious - adjective - Having or conveying undue or indecent interest in sexual matters. "salacious stories"
Voracious - adjective - Wanting or devouring great quantities of food. "a voracious appetite"
Voracious - adjective - Engaging in an activity with great eagerness or enthusiasm. "she's a voracious reader"
Pliable - adjective - Easily bent; flexible. "quality leather is pliable and will not crack"
Pliable - adjective - Easily influenced. "pliable teenage minds"
Coda - noun - MUSIC - The concluding passage of a piece or movement, typically forming an addition to the basic structure. "the first movement ends with a fortissimo coda"
Coda - noun - The concluding section of a dance, especially of a pas de deux or the finale of a ballet in which the dancers parade before the audience.
Coda - noun - A concluding event, remark, or section. "his new novel is a kind of coda to his previous books"
Cavort - verb - Jump or dance around excitedly. "the players cavorted about the pitch"
Pugnacious - adjective - Eager or quick to argue, quarrel, or fight. "the increasingly pugnacious demeanour of right-wing politicians"
Emanate - verb - (of a feeling, quality, or sensation) issue or spread out from (a source). "warmth emanated from the fireplace"
Emanate - verb - Originate from; be produced by. "the proposals emanated from a committee"
Emanate - verb - Give out or emit (a feeling, quality, or sensation). "he emanated a powerful brooding air"
QUOTE: On Deep Blue a chess-playing computer, "A human achievement by the IBM team. Deep blue was only intelligent the way your alarm clock is intelligent. Not that losing to a $10 million alarm clock made me feel any better." - Garry Kasparov
Posit - verb - Put forward as fact or as a basis for argument. "the Confucian view posits a perfectible human nature"
FACT: Alan Turing was gay and in 1952 was convicted for 'gross indecency'. He was obliged to accept chemical castration and lost clearance to work on government project. He died by cyanide poisoning in 1954, probably an act of suicide.
FACT: The technological singularity (the singularity) is the hypothesis that the invention of artificial superintelligence will abruptly trigger runaway technological growth, resulting in unfathomable changes to human civilization.
Disparate - adjective - Essentially different in kind; not able to be compared. "they inhabit disparate worlds of thought"
Fathom - noun - A unit of length equal to six feet (1.8 metres), chiefly used in reference to the depth of water. "sonar says that we're in eighteen fathoms"
Fathom - verb - Understand (a difficult problem or an enigmatic person) after much thought. "the locals could not fathom out the reason behind his new-found prosperity"
Enigmatic - adjective - Difficult to interpret or understand; mysterious. "he took the money with an enigmatic smile"
Heedless - adjective - Showing a reckless lack of care or attention. "‘Elaine!’ she shouted, heedless of attracting unwanted attention"
Arable - adjective - (of land) used or suitable for growing crops. "acres of arable land"
QUOTE: "The universe is under no obligation to make sense to you" - Neil DeGrasse Tyson.
FACT: Nearly 14 billion years ago, all the space and all the matter and all the energy of the known universe was contained in one-trillionth the size of the period that ends this sentence.
Tenet - noun - A principle or belief, especially one of the main principles of a religion or philosophy. "the tenets of classical liberalism"
Elude - verb - Escape from or avoid (a danger, enemy, or pursuer), typically in a skillful or cunning way. "he tried to elude the security men by sneaking through a back door"
Elude - verb - (of an achievement or something desired) fail to be attained by (someone). "sleep still eluded her"
FACT: There are four conventionally accepted fundamental interactions—gravitational, electromagnetic (binding molecules), strong nuclear (binding atomic nucleus), and weak nuclear (radioactive decay).
Photon - noun - PHYSICS A particle representing a quantum of light or other electromagnetic radiation. A photon carries energy proportional to the radiation frequency but has zero rest mass.
Tepid - adjective - (especially of a liquid) only slightly warm; lukewarm. "she soaked a flannel in the tepid water"
Tepid - adjective - Showing little enthusiasm. "the applause was tepid"
FACT: A hadron(comes from hadros in Greek meaning 'thick') is a particle which consists of a number of quarks held together by the subatomic strong force. Protons and neutrons are examples of a hadron. 
FACT: The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), in Switzerland, is the world's biggest and most powerful particle accelerator. Protons are sent through the tunnel in opposite directions, upon colliding, they create conditions similar to the early universe.
FACT: Without the billion-and-one to a billion imbalance between matter and antimatter, all mass in the universe would self annihilate leaving nothing but a cosmos made of photons.
FACT: A light-year is the distance light travels in one Earth year-nearly six trillion miles, ten trillion kilometers
Fortuitous - adjective - Happening by chance rather than intention. "the similarity between the paintings may not be simply fortuitous"
Fortuitous - adjective - Happening by a lucky chance; fortunate. "the ball went into the goal by a fortuitous ricochet"
FACT: Had the Earth been much closer to the sun, the oceans would have evaporated, much farther away, the would have frozen. Life as we know it would not have evolved.
Aerobic - adjective - BIOLOGY - Relating to, involving, or requiring free oxygen. "simple aerobic bacteria"
FACT: Voyager 1 and 2 contain discs with greetings, music from Chuck Berry and Beethoven, human heartbeats, babies crying and animal sounds.
Opaque - adjective - Not able to be seen through; not transparent. "bottles filled with a pale opaque liquid"
FACT: Nanosecond is a billionth of a second, a picosecond is a trillionth of a second.
Incarnation - noun - A person who embodies in the flesh a deity, spirit, or quality. "Rama was Vishnu's incarnation on earth"
FACT: In 1929, Edwin Hubble, an astronomer at Caltech, made a critical discovery that the universe is expanding. 
Detritus - noun - Waste or debris of any kind. "the streets were foul with detritus"
Proverb - noun - A short, well-known pithy saying, stating a general truth or piece of advice.
FACT: Nicolaus Copernicus was a mathematician and astronomer who formulated a model of the universe that placed the Sun rather than the Earth at the center of the universe.
Geocentric - adjective - Having or representing the earth as the centre, as in former astronomical systems.
Postulate - verb - Suggest or assume the existence, fact, or truth of (something) as a basis for reasoning, discussion, or belief. "his theory postulated a rotatory movement for hurricanes"
Beguiling - adjective - Charming or enchanting, often in a deceptive way. "a beguiling mixture of English, French and Italian"
Fruition - noun - The realization or fulfillment of a plan or project. "the plans have come to fruition rather sooner than expected"
Hapless - adjective - (especially of a person) unfortunate. "the hapless victims of the disaster"
FACT: If we sped up the Earth's orbital speed by the square root of two (1.4142...), our planet would achieve escape velocity and leave our Solar System entirely.
Discrepancy - noun - An illogical or surprising lack of compatibility or similarity between two or more facts. "there's a discrepancy between your account and his"
Status quo - noun - The existing state of affairs, especially regarding social or political issues. "they have a vested interest in maintaining the status quo"
FACT: Olympus Mons is a very large shield volcano on the planet Mars. It has a height of nearly 22 and stands about two and a half times as tall as Mount Everest's height above sea level. It is the tallest mountain in the Solar System.
Augment - verb - Make (something) greater by adding to it; increase.
FACT: The Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical radio Telescope (FAST) is located in China and is larger in area than thirty football fields.
FACT: Latest estimates, extrapolating from current catalogs, suggests as many as forty billion Earth-like planets in the Milky-Way alone and the known universe harbors some 100 billion galaxies.
Offal - noun - The entrails and internal organs of an animal used as food. "eating pieces of braised offal turned his stomach"
Offal - noun - Waste material. "the packing plant dumped its offal into the stream"
Offal - noun - Decomposing animal flesh. "gulls pecking at piles of offal from the narwhal hunt"
Exorbitant - adjective - (of a price or amount charged) unreasonably high. "some hotels charge exorbitant rates for phone calls"
Morsel - noun - A small piece or amount of food; a mouthful. "Juliet pushed a morsel of toast into her mouth"
Convene - verb - Come or bring together for a meeting or activity; assemble. "he had convened a secret meeting of military personnel"
FACT: In 2010, malnutrition and famine killed 1 million and obesity killed 3 million.
FACT: Black death, between 75 million and 200 million people died, more than a quarter of Eurasia.
Calamity - noun - An event causing great and often sudden damage or distress; a disaster. "emergency measures may be necessary in order to avert a calamity"
FACT: On the 18th of January 1778, British Explorer James Cook reached Hawaii.
Virulent - adjective - (of a disease or poison) extremely severe or harmful in its effects. "a virulent strain of influenza"
Virulent - adjective - Bitterly hostile. "a virulent attack on liberalism"
FACT: The First World War, the total number of both civilian and military casualties is estimated at around 40 million people between 1914-1918.
FACT: Kinshasa is the capital and the largest city of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It is situated on the Congo River.
FACT: In the developed world less than 1% die before adulthood, 5% globally.
FACT: In 1979, the World Health Organization declared that smallpox was completely eradicated. It was the first epidemic humans to ever have been wiped off the earth.
FACT: In January 2016 The World Health Organization (WHO) declared the Ebola epidemic, it infected 30,000 people and 12,000 of them.
Ostensibly - adverb - As appears or is stated to be true, though not necessarily so; apparently. "the party secretary resigned, ostensibly from ill health"
FACT: 2 patients were admitted to hospital in 1981, one died seemingly from pneumonia and the other cancer, it was not clear they both had AIDs. AIDs was a hard disease to diagnose.
FACT: Teixobactin is a new type of anti-biotic that bacteria have no resistance to yet.
Rescind - verb - Revoke, cancel, or repeal (a law, order, or agreement). "the government eventually rescinded the directive"
FACT: In ancient agricultural times, violence caused 15% of all deaths. In the 20th century it was 5% and in the early 21st century, it accounts for 1% of global deaths.
FACT: Anton Cheknov a Russian playright famously said that if a gun appears in your play in the first act, it will be fired in the third act.
Myriad - noun - A countless or extremely great number of people or things. "myriads of insects danced around the light above my head"
FACT: In 1989, the United Nations declared that everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.
FACT: Calico, a company founded by Google in 2013 whose stated mission is to 'Solve death'.
Plethora - noun - A large or excessive amount of something. "a plethora of committees and subcommittees"
Balk - verb - Hesitate or be unwilling to accept an idea or undertaking. "he balked at such a drastic solution"
FACT: Modern medicine hasn't extended our natural life-span by a single day, it has only saved it from premature death.
Piety - noun - The quality of being religious or reverent. "acts of piety and charity"
QUOTE: On being asked about living on after death, on the big screen, "I don't want to achieve immortality through my work. I want to achieve it through not dying.” - Woody Allen.
Elixir - noun - A magical or medicinal potion. "an elixir guaranteed to induce love"
FACT: The philosopher, Epicurus of ancient Greece, explained worshiping God's is a waste of time, there is no existence after death and happiness is the sole purpose of life.
Hypervigilance - noun - MEDICAL An enhanced state of sensory sensitivity accompanied by an exaggerated intensity of behaviors whose purpose is to detect activity.
Dominion - noun - Sovereignty or control. "man's attempt to establish dominion over nature"
Dominion - noun - The territory of a sovereign or government. "the Angevin dominions"
Elation - noun - Great happiness and exhilaration. "Richard's elation at regaining his health was short-lived"
FACT: Scientists connected electrodes to rats, they could create sensations of excitement by pressing a pedal and could choose between food or the pedal. They pressed the pedal again and again until collapsing from exhausting and starvation.  
Tedium - noun - The state or quality of being tedious. "the tedium of car journeys"
Ephemeral - adjective - Lasting for a very short time. "fashions are ephemeral: new ones regularly drive out the old"
Benevolent - adjective - Well meaning and kindly. "he was something of a benevolent despot"
Benevolent - adjective - (of an organization) serving a charitable rather than a profit-making purpose. "a benevolent fund"
FACT: Sildenafil, sold as the brand name Viagra started out as a treatment for blood pressure problems.
Omnipotent - adjective - (of a deity) having unlimited power. "God is described as omnipotent and benevolent"
Omnipotent - adjective - Having great power and influence. "an omnipotent sovereign"
QUOTE: In 1923, Isabdora Duncan, a beautiful dancer said "Just imagine a child with my beauty and your brains!" to which, Nobel Prize laureate Anatole France replied "Yes, but imagine a child with my beauty and your brains"
Prevalent - adjective - Widespread in a particular area or at a particular time. "the social ills prevalent in society today"
Patently - adverb - Clearly; without doubt. "these claims were patently false"
Manifesto - noun - A public declaration of policy and aims, especially one issued before an election by a political party or candidate. "he may fudge key issues in the Labour manifesto
Engender - verb - Cause or give rise to (a feeling, situation, or condition). "the issue engendered continuing controversy"
Proletariat - noun - Working-class people regarded collectively (often used with reference to Marxism). "the growth of the industrial proletariat"
Prognosis - noun - The likely course of a medical condition. "the disease has a poor prognosis"
Prognosis - noun - An opinion, based on medical experience, of the likely course of a medical condition. "it is very difficult to make an accurate prognosis"
Prognosis - noun - A forecast of the likely outcome of a situation. "gloomy prognoses about overpopulation"
Extravaganza - noun - An elaborate and spectacular entertainment or production. "an extravaganza of dance in many forms"
Ascertain - verb - Find (something) out for certain; make sure of. "an attempt to ascertain the cause of the accident"
Bourgeois - adjective - Belonging to or characteristic of the middle class, typically with reference to its perceived materialistic values or conventional attitudes. "a rich, bored, bourgeois family"
FACT: The word hypocrite is rooted in the Greek word hypokrites, which means “stage actor, pretender, dissembler.” So think of a hypocrite as a person who pretends to be a certain way, but really acts and believes the total opposite.
Subjugate - verb - Bring under domination or control, especially by conquest. "the invaders had soon subjugated most of the population"
Theocracy - noun - A system of government in which priests rule in the name of God or a god. "his ambition is to lead a worldwide theocracy"
Melodious - adjective - Pleasant-sounding. "he heard a fruity melodious voice"
Congeal - verb - Become semi-solid, especially on cooling. "the blood had congealed into blobs"
Congeal - verb - Take shape or coalesce, especially to form a satisfying whole. "the ballet failed to congeal as a single oeuvre"
Sway - verb - Move or cause to move slowly or rhythmically backwards and forwards or from side to side. "he swayed slightly on his feet"
Sway - verb - Control or influence (a person or course of action). "he's easily swayed by other people"
Apex - noun - The top or highest part of something, especially one forming a point. "the apex of the roof"
Apex - noun - The highest point of achievement; a climax. "the apex of his career was in 1966 when he hoisted aloft the World Cup for England"
FACT: In 2009 in Nepal, a record setting 250,000 animals were sacrificed to the goddess Gadhimia.
Deluge - noun - A severe flood. "this may be the worst deluge in living memory".
FACT: The biblical story of Noah's ark was written 1000 years after the Mesopotamian version. The first thing Noah did was sacrifice some of the animals on an atlar.
Intrinsic - adjective - Belonging naturally; essential. "access to the arts is intrinsic to a high quality of life"
Sentient - adjective - Able to perceive or feel things. "she had been instructed from birth in the equality of all sentient life forms"
Espouse - verb - Adopt or support (a cause, belief, or way of life). "the left has espoused the causes of sexual and racial equality"
Humanism - noun - A rationalist outlook or system of thought attaching prime importance to human rather than divine or supernatural matters.
Evanescent - adjective - LITERARY Soon passing out of sight, memory, or existence; quickly fading or disappearing. "the evanescent Arctic summer"
Unbridled - adjective - Uncontrolled; unconstrained. "a moment of unbridled ambition"
Dogma - noun - A principle or set of principles laid down by an authority as incontrovertibly true. "the dogmas of faith"
Opprobrium - noun - Harsh criticism or censure. "the critical opprobrium generated by his films"
Opprobrium - noun - Public disgrace arising from shameful conduct. "the opprobrium of being closely associated with gangsters"
Akin - adjective - Of similar character. "something akin to gratitude overwhelmed her"
Anthropocene - adjective - Relating to or denoting the current geological age, viewed as the period during which human activity has been the dominant influence on climate and the environment.
Epoch - noun - A particular period of time in history or a person's life. "the Victorian epoch"
Epoch - noun - The beginning of a period in the history of someone or something. "these events marked an epoch in their history"
Terrestrial - adjective - On or relating to the earth. "increased ultraviolet radiation may disrupt terrestrial ecosystems"
Animism - noun - The attribution of a living soul to plants, inanimate objects, and natural phenomena.
Animism - noun - The belief in a supernatural power that organizes and animates the material universe. "beneath the veneer of Hindu religion, ancient animism runs strong"
FACT: Psychologist Harry Harlow experimented by separating baby monkeys from their mothers at birth. Choosing between a dummy metal mother with a bottle of milk and a wooden mother covered in soft cloth, the monkeys clung to the soft mother.
Lacuna - noun - An unfilled space; a gap. "the journal has filled a lacuna in Middle Eastern studies"
Autonomous - adjective - (of a country or region) having the freedom to govern itself or control its own affairs. "the federation included sixteen autonomous republics"
Autonomous - adjective - Having the freedom to act independently. "school governors are legally autonomous"
Replete - adjective - Filled or well-supplied with something. "sensational popular fiction, replete with adultery and sudden death"
Conjecture - noun - An opinion or conclusion formed on the basis of incomplete information. "conjectures about the newcomer were many and varied"
Veracity - noun - Conformity to facts; accuracy. "officials expressed doubts concerning the veracity of the story"
Edifice - noun - FORMAL - A large, imposing building.
Edifice - noun - A complex system of beliefs. "the concepts on which the edifice of capitalism was built"
Apathetic - adjective - Showing or feeling no interest, enthusiasm, or concern. "an apathetic electorate"
Presupposition - noun - A thing tacitly assumed beforehand at the beginning of a line of argument or course of action. "both men shared certain ethical presuppositions about the universe"
Sate - verb - Satisfy (a desire or an appetite) to the full. "sate your appetite at the resort's restaurant"
Sate - verb - Supply (someone) with as much as or more of something than is desired or can be managed. "he was sated with flying"
Satiate - verb - Satisfy (a desire or an appetite) to the full. "sate your appetite at the resort's restaurant"
Cache - noun - A collection of items of the same type stored in a hidden or inaccessible place. "an arms cache"
Cache - verb - Store away in hiding or for future use. "he decided that they must cache their weapons"
Dexterous - adjective - Showing or having skill, especially with the hands. "a dexterous keyboard player"
FACT: Clever Hans was a German horse who could seemingly solve mathematical problems by tapping his hoof. An investigation in 1907, psychologist Oskar Pfungst demonstrated that the horse was actually watching the reactions of his trainer.
Decrepit - adjective - Worn out or ruined because of age or neglect. "a row of decrepit houses"
Alacrity - noun - Brisk and cheerful readiness. "she accepted the invitation with alacrity"
FACT: Bucharest is the capital and largest city of Romania.
FACT: Revolutions swept Europe as the Communism fell, Nicolae Ceausescu, during his speech in Bucharest, Romania, he suddenly pauses in disbelief. Somebody booed, then another, then another... shouting abuse, live on TV.
Copulate - verb - Have sexual intercourse. "only the dominant male copulates with the female"
Amorous - adjective - Showing, feeling, or relating to sexual desire. "she rejected his amorous advances"
FACT: The Ultimatum Game allows one player to divide money between themselves and the other player. If the other players accepts its divided as such, if rejected, both players get nothing.
Meekly - adverb - In a quiet, gentle, and submissive manner. "to keep the peace, she nodded meekly and smiled"
Incensed - adjective - Very angry; enraged. "Leonora glared back at him, incensed"
Sobriquet - noun - A person's nickname. "she was a vast and haughty person who answered to the sobriquet ‘Duchesse’"
Destitute - adjective - Extremely poor and lacking the means to provide for oneself. "the charity cares for destitute children"
Inviolable - adjective - Never to be broken, infringed, or dishonoured. "an inviolable rule of chastity"
Masquerade - noun - A false show or pretence. "I doubt he could have kept up the masquerade for long"
Masquerade - verb - Pretend to be someone one is not. "a journalist masquerading as a man in distress"
Terra incognita - noun - (Latin "unknown land") is a term used in cartography for regions that have not been mapped or documented.
Chimera - noun - A thing which is hoped for but is illusory or impossible to achieve. "the economic sovereignty you claim to defend is a chimera"
Preliminary - adjective - Preceding or done in preparation for something fuller or more important. "a preliminary draft"
Voluminous - adjective - (of writing) very lengthy and detailed. "we all scribbled down voluminous notes"
Vex - verb - Make (someone) feel annoyed, frustrated, or worried, especially with trivial matters. "the memory of the conversation still vexed him"
Kosher - adjective - (of food, or premises in which food is sold, cooked, or eaten) satisfying the requirements of Jewish law. "a kosher kitchen"
Kosher - adjective - INFORMAL Genuine and legitimate. "she consulted lawyers to make sure everything was kosher"
Assertion - noun - A confident and forceful statement of fact or belief. "his assertion that his father had deserted the family"
Stultify - verb - Cause to lose enthusiasm and initiative, especially as a result of a tedious or restrictive routine. "the stultifying conformity of provincial life"
Stultify - verb - Cause (someone) to appear foolish or absurd.
Heinous - adjective - (of a person or wrongful act, especially a crime) utterly odious or wicked. "a battery of heinous crimes"
Odious - adjective - Extremely unpleasant; repulsive. "a pretty odious character"
Infanticide - noun - The crime of a mother killing her child within a year of birth. "cases of infanticide often involve extreme emotional disturbance"
FACT: On December 20th 2013, Uganda passed the Anti-Homosexuality Act, which criminalize homosexual activities, penalizing some activities with life in prison.
Obfuscate - verb - Make obscure, unclear, or unintelligible. "the spelling A will deform some familiar words and obfuscate their etymological origins"
Obfuscate - verb - Bewilder (someone). "the new rule is more likely to obfuscate people than enlighten them"
Covenant - noun - An agreement. "there was a covenant between them that her name was never to be mentioned"
Infinitesimal - adjective - Extremely small. "an infinitesimal pause"
QUOTE: "If modernity has a motto its 'shit happens'" - Yuval Noah Harari, from Homo Deus.
Deus ex machina - noun - An unexpected power or event saving a seemingly hopeless situation, especially as a contrived plot device in a play or novel.
Passé - adjective - No longer fashionable; out of date. "minis are passé—the best skirts are knee-length"
Inept - adjective - Having or showing no skill; clumsy. "the referee's inept handling of the match"
Nihilist - noun - A person who believes that life is meaningless and rejects all religious and moral principles. "dogmatic atheists and nihilists could never defend the value of human life"
Absurdism - noun - The belief that human beings exist in a purposeless, chaotic universe.
Pilfer - verb - Steal (things of little value). "she produced the handful of coins she had managed to pilfer"
Dysentery - noun - Infection of the intestines resulting in severe diarrhoea with the presence of blood and mucus in the faeces.
Languish - verb - (of a person, animal, or plant) lose or lack vitality; grow weak. "plants may appear to be languishing simply because they are dormant"
Languish - verb - Be forced to remain in an unpleasant place or situation. -"he has been languishing in jail since 1974"
Reciprocate - verb - Respond to (a gesture or action) by making a corresponding one. "the favour was reciprocated"
Panacea - noun - A solution or remedy for all difficulties or diseases. "the panacea for all corporate ills"
Juncture - noun - A particular point in events or time. "it is difficult to say at this juncture whether this upturn can be sustained"
Juncture - noun - A place where things join. "the plane crashed at the juncture of two mountains"
FACT: Narendra Damodardas Modi (born 17 September 1950) is an Indian politician who is the 16th and current Prime Minister of India, in office since May 2014.
Credo - noun - A statement of the beliefs or aims which guide someone's actions. "he announced his credo in his first editorial"
Ardent - adjective - Very enthusiastic or passionate. "an ardent supporter of the conservative cause"conviction
Conviction - noun - A firmly held belief or opinion. "she takes pride in stating her political convictions"
Arid - adjective - (of land or a climate) having little or no rain; too dry or barren to support vegetation. "the arid plains north of Cape Town"
Arid - adjective - Lacking in interest, excitement, or meaning. "his arid years in suburbia"
Surmise - verb - Suppose that something is true without having evidence to confirm it. "he surmised that something must be wrong"
Celestial - adjective - Positioned in or relating to the sky, or outer space as observed in astronomy. "a celestial body"
Celestial - adjective - Belonging or relating to heaven. "the celestial city"
Celestial - adjective - Supremely good. "the celestial beauty of music"
Attainment - noun - The action or fact of achieving a goal towards which one has worked. "the attainment of corporate aims"
Imbue - verb - Inspire or permeate with (a feeling or quality). "his works are invariably imbued with a sense of calm and serenity"
Efface - verb - Erase (a mark) from a surface. "with time, the words are effaced by the rain"
Efface - verb - Make oneself appear insignificant or inconspicuous. "to efface oneself is not the easiest of duties which the teacher can undertake"
Chasm - noun - A deep fissure in the earth's surface. "a chasm a mile long"
Chasm - noun - A profound difference between people, viewpoints, feelings, etc. "the chasm between rich and poor"
Brazen - adjective - Bold and without shame. "he went about his illegal business with a brazen assurance"
Brazen - verb - Endure an embarrassing or difficult situation by behaving with apparent confidence and lack of shame. "there was nothing to do but brazen it out"
Pundit - noun - An expert in a particular subject or field who is frequently called upon to give their opinions to the public. "political pundits were tipping him for promotion"
Vogue - noun - The prevailing fashion or style at a particular time. "the vogue is to make realistic films"
FACT: In 1917 Marcel Duchamp purchased an ordinary urinal, declared it art, named it Fountain, signed it and put it in a museum. It is considered a milestone in art history, as it raised the question, "What is art?".
PROVERB: Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
Supersede - verb - Take the place of (a person or thing previously in authority or use); supplant. "the older models of car have now been superseded"
QUOTE: "God is dead, God remains dead and we have killed him" - Friedrich Nietzche, 1883.
Cacophony - noun - A harsh discordant mixture of sounds. "a cacophony of deafening alarm bells"
Discordant - adjective - Disagreeing or incongruous. "the operative principle of democracy is a balance of discordant qualities"
Discordant - adjective - (of sounds) harsh and jarring because of a lack of harmony. "the singers continued their discordant chanting"
Empirical - adjective - Based on, concerned with, or verifiable by observation or experience rather than theory or pure logic. "they provided considerable empirical evidence to support their argument"
FACT: In Chinese philosophy, the world is sustained by the interplay of opposing complementary forces called yin and yang.
Charlatan - noun - A person falsely claiming to have a special knowledge or skill. "a self-confessed con artist and charlatan"
Limelight - noun - The focus of public attention. "the shock win has thrust him into the limelight"
FACT: That 2,000-Yard Stare, 1944, by Tom Lea is a 1944 portrait of a nameless Marine at the Battle of Peleliu.
FACT: The lyric from Chuck Berry's Song was originally "a little coloured boy named Johnny B. Goode" was changed to "little country boy" by pressure from white-owned radio stations.
Faux pas - noun - An embarrassing or tactless act or remark in a social situation. "‘I was suddenly sick in the back of their car’—it was years before he could confess his faux pas to them"
Vaunt - verb - Boast about or praise (something), especially excessively. "the much vaunted information superhighway"
Quip - noun - A witty remark. "Peter ate heartily with a quip about being a condemned man"
Brunt - noun - The worst part or chief impact of a specified action. "education will bear the brunt of the cuts"
Demarcate - verb - Set the boundaries or limits of. "plots of land demarcated by barbed wire"
Demarcate - verb - Separate or distinguish from. "art was being demarcated from the more objective science"
THOUGHT: Communism runs on a 'From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs' idea.
Discern - verb - Recognize or find out. "I can discern no difference between the two policies"
Discern - verb - Distinguish (someone or something) with difficulty by sight or with the other senses. "she could faintly discern the shape of a skull"
FACT: Experiment: people were placed in a huge brain scanner with switches in each hand. They were told to press a switch whenever they wanted. Observing neural activity they predicted the switch they'd press before the people knew themselves.
Coerce - verb - Persuade (an unwilling person) to do something by using force or threats. "he was coerced into giving evidence"
Coerce - verb - Obtain (something) from someone by using force or threats. "their confessions were allegedly coerced by torture"
Preclude - verb - Prevent from happening; make impossible. "the secret nature of his work precluded official recognition"
Preclude - verb - (of a situation or condition) prevent someone from doing something. "his difficulties preclude him from leading a normal life"
Colonoscopy - noun - MEDICINE A procedure in which a flexible fibre-optic instrument is inserted through the anus in order to examine the colon. "a colonoscopy did not show any problem"
Caveat - noun - A warning or proviso of specific stipulations, conditions, or limitations. "there are a number of caveats which concern the validity of the assessment results"
Erudite - adjective - Having or showing great knowledge or learning. "Ken could turn any conversation into an erudite discussion"
Pillage - verb - Rob a (place) using violence, especially in wartime. "the abbey was plundered and pillaged"
Progeny - noun - A descendant or the descendants of a person, animal, or plant; offspring. "shorthorn cattle are highly effective in bestowing their characteristics on their progeny"
Cognition - noun - The mental action or process of acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses. "a theory of human cognition"
Cognition - noun - A perception, sensation, idea, or intuition resulting from the process of cognition.
FACT: Seoul is the capital of South Korea
QUOTE: "Over the last half century there has been an immense advance in computer intelligence, but there has been exactly zero advance in computer consciousness" - Yuval Noah Harari from the book Homo Deus.
De facto - adverb - In fact, whether by right or not. "the country was de facto divided between two states"
Encapsulate - verb - Enclose (something) in or as if in a capsule. "the company would encapsulate the asbestos waste in concrete pellets"
Encapsulate - verb - Express the essential features of (something) succinctly. "the conclusion is encapsulated in one sentence"
Clout - noun - informal A heavy blow with the hand or a hard object. "a clout round the ear"
Clout - noun - informal Influence or power, especially in politics or business. "I knew she carried a lot of clout"
Astute - adjective - Having or showing an ability to accurately assess situations or people and turn this to one's advantage. "an astute businessman"
Thwart - verb - Prevent (someone) from accomplishing something. "he never did anything to thwart his father"
Burgeon - verb - Begin to grow or increase rapidly; flourish. "manufacturers are keen to cash in on the burgeoning demand"
Dovetail - noun - A joint formed by one or more tapered projections (tenons) on one piece which interlock with corresponding notches or recesses (mortises) in another.
Dovetail - verb - Fit or cause to fit together easily and conveniently. "plan to enable parents to dovetail their career and family commitments"
Disposition - noun - A person's inherent qualities of mind and character. "a sweet-natured girl of a placid disposition"
Disposition - noun - The way in which something is placed or arranged, especially in relation to other things. "the plan shows the disposition of the rooms"
Escapade - noun - An act or incident involving excitement, daring, or adventure. "he told of their escapade with a ‘borrowed’ truck"
Barrage - noun - A concentrated artillery bombardment over a wide area. "his forces launched an artillery barrage on the city"
Barrage - noun - An overwhelming number of questions, criticisms, or complaints delivered simultaneously or in rapid succession. "a barrage of questions"
Barrage - verb - Bombard (someone) with questions, criticisms, or complaints. "his doctor was barraged with unsolicited advice"
Oracle - noun - A priest or priestess acting as a medium through whom advice or prophecy was sought from the gods in classical antiquity.
Sovereign - noun - A supreme ruler, especially a monarch. "the Emperor became the first Japanese sovereign to visit Britain"
Sovereign - noun - A former British gold coin worth one pound sterling, now only minted for commemorative purposes.
Sovereign - adjective - Possessing supreme or ultimate power. "in modern democracies the people's will is in theory sovereign"
Uncanny - adjective - Strange or mysterious, especially in an unsettling way "an uncanny feeling that she was being watched"
Omnipresent - adjective - Widely or constantly encountered; widespread. "the omnipresent threat of natural disasters"
Avid - adjective - Having or showing a keen interest in or enthusiasm for something "an avid reader of science fiction"
Prodigious - adjective - Remarkably or impressively great in extent, size, or degree. "the stove consumed a prodigious amount of fuel"
FACT: From 2016, the 62 richest people in the world are worth as much as the poorest 3.6 billion. The population is about 7.2 million meaning, these 62 people have as much as the bottom half of everyone else.
Revamp - verb - Give new and improved form, structure, or appearance to "an attempt to revamp the museum's image"
Anthropology - noun - The study of human societies and cultures and their development.
Foster - verb - Encourage the development of (something, especially something desirable) "the teacher's task is to foster learning"
Foster - verb - Bring up (a child that is not one's own by birth). "a person who would foster Holly was found"
Socio-economic - adjective - Relating to or concerned with the interaction of social and economic factors. "socio-economic change"
FACT: Bats use echolocation to paint a picture of their surroundings.
Olfactory - adjective - Relating to the sense of smell: "the olfactory organs"
Confluence - noun - The junction of two rivers, especially rivers of approximately equal width. "the confluence of the Rivers Ouse and Foss"
Confluence - noun - An act or process of merging. "a major confluence of the world's financial markets"
Prolific - adjective - (of a plant, animal, or person) producing much fruit or foliage or many offspring. "in captivity tigers are prolific breeders"
Prolific - adjective - Present in large numbers or quantities; plentiful. "mahogany was once prolific in the tropical forests"
Venerable - adjective - Accorded a great deal of respect, especially because of age, wisdom, or character. "a venerable statesman"
Cumbersome - adjective - Large or heavy and therefore difficult to carry or use; unwieldy. "cumbersome diving suits"
Cumbersome - adjective - Slow or complicated and therefore inefficient. "organizations with cumbersome hierarchical structures"
Despot - noun - A ruler or other person who holds absolute power, typically one who exercises it in a cruel or oppressive way.
Bereft - adjective - Deprived of or lacking (something). "her room was stark and bereft of colour"
Bereft - adjective - (of a person) sad and lonely, especially through someone's death or departure. "his death in 1990 left her bereft"
Neo- - New. "neonate"
Myopic - adjective - Short-sighted. "most myopic children can be fitted with glasses to correct their vision"
Myopic - adjective - Lacking foresight or intellectual insight. "the government still has a myopic attitude to public spending"
Centrifugal - adjective - Moving or tending to move away from a centre.
Heirloom - noun - A valuable object that has belonged to a family for several generations. "the violin was a family heirloom"
Atman - noun - HINDUISM The spiritual life principle of the universe, especially when regarded as immanent in the individual's real self.
Suffuse - verb - Gradually spread through or over. "her cheeks were suffused with colour"
Impinge - verb - Have an effect, especially a negative one. "several factors impinge on market efficiency"
Impinge - verb - Advance over an area belonging to someone or something else; encroach. "the proposed fencing would impinge on a public bridleway"
Efficacy - noun - The ability to produce a desired or intended result. "there is little information on the efficacy of this treatment"
Adulate - verb - Praise (someone) excessively. "he was adulated in the press"
FACT: An average 27,000 died each day between 1939 and 1945 as a consequence of global conflict.
Lustre - noun - A gentle sheen or soft glow. "the lustre of the Milky Way"
Admonish - verb - Reprimand firmly. "she admonished me for appearing at breakfast unshaven"
Admonish - verb - Advise or urge (someone) earnestly. "she admonished him to drink no more than one glass of wine"
Reprimand - noun - A formal expression of disapproval. "the golfer received a reprimand for a breach of rules"
Carnal - adjective - Relating to physical, especially sexual, needs and activities. "carnal desire"
Nebulous - adjective - In the form of a cloud or haze; hazy. "a giant nebulous glow"
Nebulous - adjective - (of a concept) vague or ill-defined. "nebulous concepts like quality of life"
Mandate - noun - An official order or commission to do something "a mandate to seek the release of political prisoners"
Mandate - noun - The authority to carry out a policy, regarded as given by the electorate to a party or candidate that wins an election:  "he called an election to seek a mandate for his policies"
Mandate - verb - Give (someone) authority to act in a certain way "the rightful king was mandated and sanctioned by God"
Relinquish - verb - Voluntarily cease to keep or claim; give up "he relinquished his managerial role to become chief executive"
Consign - verb - Deliver (something) to a person's keeping. "he consigned three paintings to Sotheby's"
Consign - verb - Send (goods) by a public carrier. "the package was consigned by a famous sporting goods company"
Consign - verb - Put someone or something in (a place) in order to be rid of it or them. "she consigned the letter to the waste-paper basket"
Sunder - verb - LITERARY Split apart. "a universe sundered ages ago in a divine war"
Equivocal - adjective - Open to more than one interpretation; ambiguous. "the equivocal nature of her remarks"
Equivocal - adjective - (of a person) using ambiguous or evasive language. "he has always been equivocal about the meaning of his lyrics"
Equivocal - adjective - Uncertain or questionable in nature. "the results of the investigation were equivocal"
Staunch - adjective - Very loyal and committed in attitude. "a staunch supporter of the anti-nuclear lobby"
Staunch - adjective - (of a wall) of strong or firm construction. "these staunch walls could withstand attack by cannon"
Belligerent - adjective - Hostile and aggressive. "the mood at the meeting was belligerent"
Belligerent - noun - A nation or person engaged in war or conflict, as recognized by international law. "ships and goods captured at sea by a belligerent"
Prophetic - adjective - Accurately predicting what will happen in the future. "his warnings proved prophetic"
Prophetic - adjective - Relating to or characteristic of a prophet or prophecy. "the prophetic books of the Old Testament"
Imminent - adjective - About to happen. "they were in imminent danger of being swept away"
Acquiesce - verb - Accept something reluctantly but without protest. "Sara acquiesced in his decision"
Flurry - noun - A small swirling mass of something, especially snow or leaves, moved by sudden gusts of wind. "a flurry of snow"
Flurry - noun - A sudden short period of activity or excitement. "there was a brief flurry of activity in the hall"
Flurry - noun - A number of things arriving or happening suddenly and during the same period. "a flurry of editorials hostile to the government"
Inertia - noun - A tendency to do nothing or to remain unchanged. "the bureaucratic inertia of the various tiers of government"
Strident - adjective - Presenting a point of view, especially a controversial one, in an excessively forceful way. "public pronouncements on the crisis became less strident"
Tumultuous - adjective - Making an uproar or loud, confused noise. "tumultuous applause"
Tumultuous - adjective - excited, confused, or disorderly. "a tumultuous crowd"
Succour - noun - Assistance and support in times of hardship and distress. "the wounded had little chance of succour"
Succour - verb - Give assistance or aid to. "prisoners of war were liberated and succoured"
Prostrate - adjective - Lying stretched out on the ground with one's face downwards. "there was a man praying before an idol, lying prostrate"
Prostrate - adjective - Completely overcome or helpless, especially with distress or exhaustion. "his wife was prostrate with shock"
Prostrate - verb - Throw oneself flat on the ground so as to be lying face downwards, especially in reverence or submission. "she prostrated herself on the bare floor of the church"
Prostrate - verb - Reduce (someone) to extreme physical weakness. "she was so prostrated by migraine that she could scarcely totter up the stairs to bed"
Desultory - adjective - Lacking a plan, purpose, or enthusiasm. "a few people were left, dancing in a desultory fashion"
Desultory - adjective - (of conversation or speech) going from one subject to another in a half-hearted way. "the desultory conversation faded"
Desultory - adjective - Occurring randomly or occasionally. "desultory passengers were appearing"
Flotsam - noun - Debris in the water that was not deliberately thrown overboard, often as a result from a shipwreck or accident. 
Flotsam - noun - People or things that have been rejected or discarded as worthless. "the room was cleared of boxes and other flotsam"
Jetsam - noun - Unwanted material or goods that have been thrown overboard from a ship and washed ashore, especially material that has been discarded to lighten the vessel. "there was plenty of good kindling among the jetsam on the beach"
Motley - adjective - Incongruously varied in appearance or character; disparate. "a motley crew of discontents and zealots"
Motley - adjective - (of clothing) made up of a variety of colours. "they wore the motley coat of jesters"
Posterity - noun - All future generations of people. "the victims' names are recorded for posterity"
Fastidious - adjective - Very attentive to and concerned about accuracy and detail. "she dressed with fastidious care"
Emaciated - adjective - Abnormally thin or weak, especially because of illness or a lack of food. "she was so emaciated she could hardly stand"
Liaison - noun - Communication or cooperation which facilitates a close working relationship between people or organizations. "the head porter works in close liaison with the reception office"
Liaison - noun - A person who acts as a link to assist communication or cooperation between people. "he's our liaison with a number of interested parties"
Ordeal - noun - A very unpleasant and prolonged experience. "the ordeal of having to give evidence"
Memorandum - noun - A written message in business or diplomacy. "he told them of his decision in a memorandum"
Memorandum - noun - A note recording something for future use. "the two countries signed a memorandum of understanding on economic cooperation"
Aspiration - noun - A hope or ambition of achieving something:  "the needs and aspirations of the people" 
Implacable - adjective - Unable to be appeased or placated "he was an implacable enemy of Ted's"
Earnest - adjective - Resulting from or showing sincere and intense conviction "an earnest student"
Galvanize - verb - Shock or excite (someone) into taking action. "the urgency of his voice galvanized them into action"
Gratuitous - adjective - Done without good reason; uncalled for "gratuitous violence"
Gratuitous - adjective - Given or done free of charge. "solicitors provide a form of gratuitous legal advice"
Resolutely - adverb - In an admirably purposeful, determined, and unwavering manner "she resolutely refused to be bullied by those around her"
Slovenly - adjective - (especially of a person or their appearance) untidy and dirty. "a fat, slovenly ex-rock star"
Slovenly - adjective - (especially of a person or action) careless; excessively casual. "slovenly speech"
Insubordinate - adjective - Defiant of authority; disobedient to orders. "an insubordinate attitude"
Equivocal - adjective - Open to more than one interpretation; ambiguous. "the equivocal nature of her remarks"
Equivocal - adjective - (of a person) using ambiguous or evasive language. "he has always been equivocal about the meaning of his lyrics"
Equivocal - adjective - Uncertain or questionable in nature. "the results of the investigation were equivocal"
FACT: Following the assassination attempt upon Hitler in November, 1939, the Pope sent him a personal note of congratulations on his miraculous survival.
FACT: Helsinki is the capital and largest city of Finland.
Lexicon - noun - The vocabulary of a person, language, or branch of knowledge. "the size of the English lexicon"
Scant - adjective - Barely sufficient or adequate. "companies with scant regard for the safety of future generations"
FACT: Molotov cocktail comes from the name of Vyacheslav Molotov, who led the Soviet campaign against Finland in 1939–40, when such weapons were used by the Finns.
Collusion - noun - Secret or illegal cooperation or conspiracy in order to deceive others. "the armed forces were working in collusion with drug traffickers"
Virile - adjective - (of a man) having strength, energy, and a strong sex drive. "he was a powerful, virile man"
Virile - adjective - Having or characterized by strength and energy. "a strong, virile performance of the Mass"
Gallantly - adverb - In a brave or heroic manner. "these young soldiers fought gallantly for their nation"
Gallantly - adverb - In a charmingly attentive and chivalrous manner. "he bowed gallantly"
Token - noun - A thing serving as a visible or tangible representation of a fact, quality, feeling, etc. "mistletoe was cut from an oak tree as a token of good fortune"
Token - noun - A voucher that can be exchanged for goods or services, typically one given as a gift or forming part of a promotional offer. "a record token"
Token - adjective - Done for the sake of appearances or as a symbolic gesture. "cases like these often bring just token fines from magistrates"
Vacuity - noun - Lack of thought or intelligence; empty-headedness. "he denounced what he considered the frivolity or vacuity of much contemporary painting"
Vacuity - noun - Empty space; emptiness.
Frivolity - noun - Lack of seriousness; light-heartedness. "a night of fun and frivolity"
Frivolous - adjective - Not having any serious purpose or value. "frivolous ribbons and lacy frills"
Frivolous - adjective - (of a person) carefree and superficial. "the frivolous, fun-loving flappers of the twenties"
Flippant - adjective - Not showing a serious or respectful attitude. "a flippant remark"
Vacillate - verb - Waver between different opinions or actions; be indecisive. "I vacillated between teaching and journalism"
Sulphurous - adjective - Marked by anger or profanity. "a sulphurous glance"
Repudiate - verb - Refuse to accept; reject. "she has repudiated policies associated with previous party leaders"
Repudiate - verb - Deny the truth or validity of. "the minister repudiated allegations of human rights abuses"
Gaunt - adjective - (of a person) lean and haggard, especially because of suffering, hunger, or age. "a tall, gaunt woman in black"
Gaunt - adjective - (of a building or place) grim or desolate in appearance. "gaunt tenement blocks"
FACT: Norway gained independence from Sweden in 1905.
FACT: Oslo is the capital and the most populous city in Norway.
Imperil - verb - Put at risk of being harmed, injured, or destroyed. "they advised against tax increases for fear of imperilling the recovery"
Peppery - adjective - (of a person) irritable and sharp-tongued. "retired generals are expected to be peppery"
Demur - verb - Raise objections or show reluctance. "normally she would have accepted the challenge, but she demurred"
Demur - noun - The action of objecting to or hesitating over something. "they accepted this ruling without demur"
Jaunty - adjective - Having or expressing a lively, cheerful, and self-confident manner. "there was no mistaking that jaunty walk"
Untenable - adjective - (especially of a position or view) not able to be maintained or defended against attack or objection. "this argument is clearly untenable"
Miasma - noun - An unpleasant or unhealthy smell or vapour. "a miasma of stale alcohol hung around him"
Miasma - noun - An oppressive or unpleasant atmosphere which surrounds or emanates from something. "a miasma of despair rose from the black workshops"
Demeanour - noun - Outward behaviour or bearing. "his happy demeanour"
Splenetic - adjective - Bad-tempered; spiteful: "a splenetic rant"
Calamitous - adjective - Involving calamity; catastrophic or disastrous: "such calamitous events as fires, hurricanes, and floods"
Vagrant - noun - A person without a settled home or regular work who wanders from place to place and lives by begging.
Valediction - noun - The action of saying farewell. "he lifted his hand and spread his palm in valediction"
Valediction - noun - A statement or address made at or as a farewell. "his official memorial valediction"
Splendour - noun - Magnificent and splendid appearance; grandeur. "the barren splendour of the Lake District"
Splendour - noun - Magnificent features or qualities. "the splendours of the imperial court"
Fiasco - noun - A complete failure, especially a ludicrous or humiliating one. -"his plans turned into a fiasco"
Armistice - noun - An agreement made by opposing sides in a war to stop fighting for a certain time; a truce. "the Italian government signed an armistice with the Allies"
Contented - adjective - Feeling or expressing happiness or satisfaction. "I felt warm and contented"
Contented - adjective - Willing to accept something; satisfied. "I was never contented with half measures"
Ineptitude - noun - Lack of skill or ability. "the officials displayed remarkable ineptitude"
Expend - verb - Spend or use up (a resource such as money or energy). "the energy expended in sport could be directed into other areas"
QUOTE: "On the battlefield Allied soldiers, reflecting the societies from which they were drawn, prided themselves on behaving like reasonable men. The Wehrmacht showed what unreasonable men could do" - Max Hastings from 'All Hell Let Loose'
Off-kilter - adjective & adverb - Unconventional or eccentric. "an off-kilter comedy about living in mud"
Inert - adjective - Lacking the ability or strength to move. "she lay inert in her bed"
Inert - adjective - Chemically inactive. "the inert gases in meteorites"
Exude - verb - (with reference to moisture or a smell) discharge or be discharged slowly and steadily. "the beetle exudes a caustic liquid"
Exude - verb - (of a person) display (an emotion or quality) strongly and openly. "Sir Thomas exuded goodwill"
Pusillanimous - adjective - Showing a lack of courage or determination; timid.
Besmirch - verb - Damage (someone's reputation). "he had besmirched the good name of his family"
Repatriation - noun - The return of someone to their own country. "the voluntary repatriation of refugees"
Repatriation - noun - The sending of money back to one's own country. "the repatriation of profits by foreign investors"
Cadre - noun - A small group of people specially trained for a particular purpose or profession. "a cadre of professional managers"
Cadre - noun - A group of activists in a communist or other revolutionary organization. "he was an activist in the cadre"
Exultant - adjective - Triumphantly happy. "he waved to the exultant crowds"
Atavistic - adjective - Relating to or characterized by reversion to something ancient or ancestral. "atavistic fears and instincts"
Bombast - noun - High-sounding language with little meaning, used to impress people. "the bombast of gung-ho militarism"
Conscientious - adjective - Wishing to do one's work or duty well and thoroughly. "a conscientious man, he took his duties very seriously"
Maverick - noun - An unorthodox or independent-minded person. "he's the maverick of the senate"
Insouciance - noun - Casual lack of concern; indifference. "an impression of boyish insouciance"
Insouciant - adjective - Showing a casual lack of concern. "an insouciant shrug"
Nimble - adjective - Quick and light in movement or action; agile. "with a deft motion of her nimble fingers"
Nimble - adjective - (of the mind) able to think and understand quickly. "her mind was so nimble and she was so quick to learn"
Capitulate - verb - Cease to resist an opponent or an unwelcome demand; yield. "the patriots had to capitulate to the enemy forces"
Bolshevism - noun - The communist form of government adopted in Russia following the Bolshevik revolution of 1917. "enthusiastic supporters of Bolshevism"
FACT: Operation Barbarossa was the code name for the Axis invasion of the Soviet Union, starting Sunday, 22 June 1941, during World War II.
Malign - adjective - Evil in nature or effect "she had a strong and malign influence"
Bemuse - verb - bemused - Puzzle, confuse, or bewilder "her bemused expression"
Antagonist - noun - A person who actively opposes or is hostile to someone or something; an adversary. "the woman was forcing her antagonist's face into the mud"
Orator - noun - A public speaker, especially one who is eloquent or skilled. "a theatrically effective orator"
Nascent - adjective - (especially of a process or organization) just coming into existence and beginning to display signs of future potential. "the nascent space industry"
Sybaritic - adjective - Fond of sensuous luxury or pleasure; self-indulgent. "their opulent and sybaritic lifestyle"
Expedient - adjective - (of an action) convenient and practical although possibly improper or immoral. "either side could break the agreement if it were expedient to do so"
Expedient - adjective - (of an action) suitable or appropriate. "holding a public enquiry into the scheme was not expedient"
Expedient - noun - A means of attaining an end, especially one that is convenient but possibly improper or immoral. "the current policy is a political expedient"
Craven - adjective - Contemptibly lacking in courage; cowardly. "a craven abdication of his moral duty"
Tentatively - adverb - Subject to further confirmation; not definitely. "the project is tentatively scheduled for next year"
Tentatively - adverb - In a way that lacks confidence; hesitantly. ""Are you all right?" Claire asked tentatively"
Paraphernalia - noun - Miscellaneous articles, especially the equipment needed for a particular activity. "drills, saws, and other paraphernalia necessary for home improvements"
Paraphernalia - noun - Trappings associated with a particular institution or activity that are regarded as superfluous. "the rituals and paraphernalia of government"
Wearily - adverb - With extreme tiredness. "he sighed wearily and hauled himself to his feet"
Farce - noun - A comic dramatic work using buffoonery and horseplay and typically including crude characterization and ludicrously improbable situations. "he toured the backwoods in second-rate farces"
Farce - noun - An event or situation that is absurd or disorganized. "the debate turned into a drunken farce"
Dismay - noun - Concern and distress caused by something unexpected. "to his dismay, she left him"
Detritus - noun - Waste or debris of any kind. "the streets were foul with detritus"
Evocative - adjective - Bringing strong images, memories, or feelings to mind. "powerfully evocative lyrics"
Garrison - noun - A group of troops stationed in a fortress or town to defend it. "the entire garrison was mustered on the parade ground"
Animosity - noun - Strong hostility. "he no longer felt any animosity towards her"
Impenitent - adjective - Not feeling shame or regret about one's actions or attitudes. "impenitent elitists"
Conspicuous - adjective - Clearly visible. "he was very thin, with a conspicuous Adam's apple"
Conspicuous - adjective - Attracting notice or attention. "he showed conspicuous bravery"
Nuanced - adjective - Characterized by subtle shades of meaning or expression. "Lowe's work has gradually grown more nuanced"
Acrid - adjective - Unpleasantly bitter or pungent. "acrid smoke"
Trepidation - noun - A feeling of fear or anxiety about something that may happen. "the men set off in fear and trepidation"
Goldilocks - noun - Denoting or referring to the most desirable or advantageous part of a range of values or conditions (typically the centre). "the planet is in the middle of what astronomers call the Goldilocks zone : a place that's not too hot and not too cold"
Barbarity - noun - Extreme cruelty or brutality. "the barbarity displayed by the terrorists"
Barbarity - noun - Absence of culture and civilization. "beyond the Empire lay barbarity"
Pragmatic - adjective - Dealing with things sensibly and realistically in a way that is based on practical rather than theoretical considerations. "a pragmatic approach to politics"
Complicity - noun - The fact or condition of being involved with others in an activity that is unlawful or morally wrong. "they were accused of complicity in the attempt to overthrow the government"
Duplicity - noun - Deceitfulness. "the president was accused of duplicity in his dealings with Congress"
Bilateral - adjective - Having or relating to two sides; affecting both sides. "bilateral hearing"
Bilateral - adjective - Involving two parties, especially countries. "the bilateral agreements with Japan"
Acolyte - noun - A person assisting a priest in a religious service or procession.
Acolyte - noun - An assistant or follower. "she runs the department through a small group of acolytes"
Euphoria - noun - A feeling or state of intense excitement and happiness. "in his euphoria, he had become convinced he could defeat them"
Contrive - verb - Create or bring about (an object or a situation) by deliberate use of skill and artifice. "his opponents contrived a cabinet crisis"
Contrive - verb - Manage to do something foolish or create an undesirable situation. "he contrived to flood the flat three times"
Artifice - noun - Clever or cunning devices or expedients, especially as used to trick or deceive others. "an industry dominated by artifice"
FACT: Capital city of Lithuania is Vilnius.
Self-justification - noun - The justification or excusing of oneself or one's actions.
Interlocutor - noun - FORMAL - A person who takes part in a dialogue or conversation.
Rouse - verb - Cause to stop sleeping. "she was roused from a deep sleep by a hand on her shoulder"
Rouse - verb - Make angry or excited. "the crowds were roused to fever pitch by the drama of the race"
Implicit - adjective - Suggested though not directly expressed. "comments seen as implicit criticism of the policies"
Implicit - adjective - Always to be found in; essentially connected with. "the values implicit in the school ethos"
Draconian - adjective - (of laws or their application) excessively harsh and severe. "the Nazis destroyed the independence of the press by a series of draconian laws"
Pretence - noun - An attempt to make something that is not the case appear true. "his anger is masked by a pretence that all is well"
Pretence - noun - A claim to have a particular skill or quality. "he was quick to disclaim any pretence to superiority"
Grievous - adjective - FORMAL (of something bad) very severe or serious. "his death was a grievous blow"
Impediment - noun - A hindrance or obstruction in doing something. "a serious impediment to scientific progress"
Impediment - noun - A defect in a person's speech, such as a lisp or stammer.
Partisan - adjective - Prejudiced in favour of a particular cause. "newspapers have become increasingly partisan"
Despondent - adjective - In low spirits from loss of hope or courage. "she grew more and more despondent"
Chronic - adjective - (of an illness) persisting for a long time or constantly recurring. "chronic bronchitis"
Supplant - verb - Supersede and replace. "domestic production has been supplanted by imports and jobs have been lost"
Epitome - noun - A person or thing that is a perfect example of a particular quality or type. "she looked the epitome of elegance and good taste"
Flounder - verb - Struggle or stagger clumsily in mud or water. "he was floundering about in the shallow offshore waters"
Flounder - verb - Struggle mentally; show or feel great confusion. "she floundered, not knowing quite what to say"
Flounder - verb - Be in serious difficulty. "many firms are floundering"
Irrepressible - adjective - Incapable of being repressed or restrained; uncontrollable "Irrepressible laughter."
Morbid - adjective - Characterized by an abnormal and unhealthy interest in disturbing and unpleasant subjects, especially death and disease. "his morbid fascination with the horrors of contemporary warfare"
Prescient - adjective - Having or showing knowledge of events before they take place. "a prescient warning"
Gesticulate - verb - Use gestures, especially dramatic ones, instead of speaking or to emphasize one's words. "they were shouting and gesticulating frantically at drivers who did not slow down"
Malignant - adjective - Evil in nature or effect; malevolent. "in the hands of malignant fate"
Beleaguer - verb - Lay siege to. "he led a relief force to the aid of the beleaguered city"
Beleaguer - verb - Put in a very difficult situation. "the board is supporting the beleaguered director"
Magnum opus - noun - Masterpiece (LATIN for good work) A work of art, music, or literature that is regarded as the most important or best work that an artist, composer, or writer has produced.
Cohesion - noun - The action or fact of forming a united whole. "the work at present lacks cohesion"
Fallible - adjective - Capable of making mistakes or being wrong. "experts can be fallible"
Inimical - adjective - Tending to obstruct or harm. "the policy was inimical to Britain's real interests"
Inimical - adjective - Unfriendly; hostile. "an inimical alien power"
Insular - adjective - Ignorant of or uninterested in cultures, ideas, or peoples outside one's own experience. "a stubbornly insular farming people"
Surfeit - noun - An excessive amount of something. "a surfeit of food and drink"
Procure - verb - Obtain (something), especially with care or effort. "food procured for the rebels"
Penchant - noun - A strong or habitual liking for something or tendency to do something. "he has a penchant for adopting stray dogs"
Debilitating - adjective - (of a disease or condition) making someone very weak and infirm. "debilitating back pain"
Debilitating - adjective - Tending to weaken something."the debilitating effects of underinvestment"
Virility - noun - (in a man) the quality of having strength, energy, and a strong sex drive; manliness. "great importance is placed on a man's virility"
Impregnable - adjective - (of a fortified position) unable to be captured or broken into. "a massive and impregnable fortress"
Impregnable - adjective - Unable to be defeated or overcome. "Liverpool used their good fortune to forge an impregnable lead"
Palatable - adjective - (of food or drink) pleasant to taste. "a very palatable local red wine"
Palatable - adjective - (of an action or proposal) acceptable or satisfactory. "a device that made increased taxation more palatable"
Duress - noun - Threats, violence, constraints, or other action used to coerce someone into doing something against their will or better judgement. "confessions extracted under duress"
Corollary - noun - A proposition that follows from (and is often appended to) one already proved.
Monolith - noun - A large single upright block of stone, especially one shaped into or serving as a pillar or monument. "we passed Stonehenge, the strange stone monoliths silhouetted against the horizon"
Monolith - noun -  A large, impersonal political, corporate, or social structure regarded as indivisible and slow to change. "independent voices have been crowded out by the media monoliths"
Sodden - adjective - Saturated with liquid, especially water; soaked through. "his clothes were sodden"
Rabble - noun - A disorderly crowd; a mob. "he was met by a rabble of noisy, angry youths"
Histrionic - adjective - Excessively theatrical or dramatic in character or style. "a histrionic outburst"
Self-immolation - noun - The offering of oneself as a sacrifice, especially by burning. "70 people died in the unrest, mainly by gunfire and self-immolation"
Altruistic - adjective - Showing a disinterested and selfless concern for the well-being of others; unselfish. "it was an entirely altruistic act"
Inveterate - adjective - Having a particular habit, activity, or interest that is long-established and unlikely to change. "an inveterate gambler"
Inveterate - adjective - (of a feeling or habit) long-established and unlikely to change. "his inveterate hostility to what he considered to be the ‘reactionary’ powers"
Exorbitant - adjective - (of a price or amount charged) unreasonably high. "some hotels charge exorbitant rates for phone calls"
Tirade - noun - A long, angry speech of criticism or accusation. "a tirade of abuse"
Vainglorious - adjective - Excessively proud of oneself or one's achievements; overly vain. "this vainglorious boast of personal infallibility"
Languid - adjective - (of a person, manner, or gesture) having or showing a disinclination for physical exertion or effort. "his languid demeanour irritated her"
Languid - adjective - Weak or faint from illness or fatigue. "she was pale, languid, and weak, as if she had delivered a child"
QUOTE: 22 Australian nurses in WW2 were driven into sea to be machine-gunned by the Japanese. The last words by their matron were recorded by the sole survivor: "Chin up, girls. I'm proud fo you and I love you all"
Chicanery - noun - The use of deception or subterfuge to achieve one's purpose. "storylines packed with political chicanery"
Moot - adjective - Subject to debate, dispute, or uncertainty. "whether the temperature rise was mainly due to the greenhouse effect was a moot point"
Moot - adjective - Having little or no practical relevance. "the whole matter is becoming increasingly moot"
Livid - adjective - Furiously angry. "he was livid that Garry had escaped"
Livid - adjective - Dark bluish grey in colour. "livid bruises"
Lethargy - noun - A lack of energy and enthusiasm. "there was an air of lethargy about him"
Revulsion - noun - A sense of disgust and loathing. "news of the attack will be met with sorrow and revulsion"
Undulate - verb - Move with a smooth wave-like motion. "her body undulated to the thumping rhythm of the music"
Vivisection - noun - The practice of performing operations on live animals for the purpose of experimentation or scientific research (used only by opponents of such work). "the abolition of vivisection"
Vivisection - noun - Ruthlessly sharp and detailed criticism or analysis. "the vivisection of America's seamy underbelly"
Verve - noun - Vigour and spirit or enthusiasm. "Kollo sings with supreme verve and flexibility"
FACT: Largest islands 1: Greenlands, 2: New Guinea, 3: Borneo, 4: Madagascar, 5: Baffin, 6: Sumatra, 7: Honshu, 8: Great Britain, 9:Victoria
Laconic - adjective - (of a person, speech, or style of writing) using very few words. "his laconic reply suggested a lack of interest in the topic"
Convalescent - adjective - (of a person) recovering from an illness or medical treatment. "a convalescent child"
Morose - adjective - Sullen and ill-tempered. "she was morose and silent when she got home"
Signet ring - noun - A ring with letters or a design carved on it.
Spurious - adjective - Not being what it purports to be; false or fake. "separating authentic and spurious claims"
Extenuate - verb - (of a factor or situation) acting in mitigation to lessen the seriousness of guilt or an offence. "hunger and poverty are not treated by the courts as extenuating circumstances"
Unabated - adjective - Without any reduction in intensity or strength. "the storm was raging unabated"
Taciturn - adjective - (of a person) reserved or uncommunicative in speech; saying little. "after such gatherings she would be taciturn and morose"
Adhere - verb - Believe in and follow the practices of. "I do not adhere to any organized religion"
FACT: Silent night was written by Austrian Joseph Mohr, in German.
Rudimentary - adjective - Involving or limited to basic principles. "he received a rudimentary education"
Rudimentary - adjective - Relating to an immature, undeveloped, or basic form. "a rudimentary stage of evolution"
Stoicism - noun - The endurance of pain or hardship without the display of feelings and without complaint.
Turophobia (from the Greek word turi, meaning "cheese", and phobos, "fear") is the fear of cheese. 
FACT: Superman was first published in 1938.
Cede - verb - Give up (power or territory). "in 1874, the islands were ceded to Britain"
Intermittent - adjective - Occurring at irregular intervals; not continuous or steady. "intermittent rain"
Azure - adjective - Bright blue in colour like a cloudless sky. "thin streaks of cloud trailed across an azure sky"
Equanimity - noun - Calmness and composure, especially in a difficult situation. "she accepted both the good and the bad with equanimity"
Bravado - noun - A bold manner or a show of boldness intended to impress or intimidate. "he possesses none of the classic wheeler-dealer's casual bravado"
Expletive - noun - An oath or swear word. "he was greeted by a stream of expletives"
FACT: Bamako is the capital of Mali.
Dismal - adjective - Causing a mood of gloom or depression. "the dismal weather made the late afternoon seem like evening"
Dismal - adjective - (of a person or their mood) gloomy. "his dismal mood was not dispelled by finding the house empty"
Gaucherie - noun - Awkward or unsophisticated ways. "I was ridiculed for my sartorial gaucherie"
Lilt - noun - A characteristic rising and falling of the voice when speaking; a pleasant gentle accent. - "he spoke with a faint but recognizable Irish lilt"
Concierge - noun - (especially in France) a resident caretaker of a block of flats or a small hotel.
Concierge - noun - A hotel employee whose job is to assist guests by booking tours, making theatre and restaurant reservations, etc.
Milieu - noun - A person's social environment. "Gregory came from the same aristocratic milieu as Sidonius"
Deliberation - noun - Long and careful consideration or discussion. "after much deliberation we arrived at a compromise"
Deliberation - noun - Slow and careful movement or thought."he replaced the glass on the table with deliberation"
Depravity - noun - Moral corruption; wickedness. "a tale of depravity hard to credit"
Derisory - adjective - Ridiculously small or inadequate. "they were given a derisory pay rise"
Coarse - adjective - Rough or harsh in texture. "a coarse woollen cloth"
Coarse - adjective - (of a person or their speech) rude or vulgar. "a man of coarse speech"
Genteel - adjective - Characterized by exaggerated or affected politeness, refinement, or respectability. "her genteel upbringing"
Debutante - noun - An upper-class young woman making her first appearance in fashionable society.
Phlegmatic - adjective - (of a person) having an unemotional and stolidly calm disposition. "the phlegmatic British character"
Blithely - adverb - In a way that shows a casual and cheerful indifference considered to be callous or improper. "her arrest order was blithely ignored by the police chief"
Feign - verb - Pretend to be affected by (a feeling, state, or injury). "she feigned nervousness"
Cordially - adverb - In a warm and friendly way. "he was greeted cordially by the archbishop"
Cordially - adverb - With intense feeling. "he was cordially detested for his brutality and injustice"
Vindicate - verb - Clear (someone) of blame or suspicion. "hospital staff were vindicated by the inquest verdict"
Vindicate - verb - Show or prove to be right, reasonable, or justified. "more sober were vindicated by events"
Humility - noun - The quality of having a modest or low view of one's importance. "he needs the humility to accept that their way may be better"
FACT: The capital city of Nepal is Kathmandu.
Altercation - noun - A noisy argument or disagreement, especially in public. "I had an altercation with the ticket collector"
Coulrophobia - noun - Extreme or irrational fear of clowns. "it has emerged that the multi-millionaire entrepreneur suffers from coulrophobia"
Cutlass - noun - A short sword with a slightly curved blade, formerly used by sailors.
Quaint - adjective - Attractively unusual or old-fashioned. "quaint country cottages"
Tenuous - adjective - Very weak or slight. "the tenuous link between interest rates and investment"
Tenuous - adjective - Very slender or fine; insubstantial. "a tenuous cloud"
Monosyllabic - adjective - (of a word or utterance) consisting of one syllable.
Monosyllabic - adjective - (of a person) using brief or few words to signify reluctance to engage in conversation. "a monosyllabic footballer"
Felicity - noun - Intense happiness. "domestic felicity"
Felicity - noun - The ability to find appropriate expression for one's thoughts. "he exposed the kernel of the matter with his customary elegance and felicity"
Kernel - noun - A softer, usually edible part of a nut, seed, or fruit stone contained within its shell. "the kernel of a walnut"
Kernel - noun - The central or most important part of something. "this is the kernel of the argument"
Vista - noun - A pleasing view. "sweeping lawns and landscaped vistas"
Vista - noun - A long, narrow view as between rows of trees or buildings, especially one closed by a building or other structure.
Vista - noun - A mental view of a succession of remembered or anticipated events. "vistas of freedom seemed to open ahead of him"
Nominal - adjective - (of a role or status) existing in name only. "Thailand retained nominal independence under Japanese military occupation"
Nominal - adjective - (of a price or charge) very small; far below the real value or cost. "they charge a nominal fee for the service"
Homogeneous - adjective - Of the same kind; alike. "if all jobs and workers were homogeneous"
Vociferous - adjective - Expressing or characterized by vehement opinions; loud and forceful. "he was a vociferous opponent of the takeover"
Philanthropist - noun - A person who seeks to promote the welfare of others, especially by the generous donation of money to good causes. "the trust was founded by an American philanthropist"
Indignant - adjective - Feeling or showing anger or annoyance at what is perceived as unfair treatment. "he was indignant at being the object of suspicion"
Abnegation - noun - The action of renouncing or rejecting something. "abnegation of political power"
FACT: South Africa does not have one specific capital. Capitals are Pretoria (executive), Bloemfontein (judicial) and Cape Town (legislative). Johannesburg is it's largest city.
Parochial - adjective - Relating to a Church parish. "the parochial church council"
Parochial - adjective - Having a limited or narrow outlook or scope. "parochial attitudes"
Laceration - noun - A deep cut or tear in skin or flesh. "he suffered lacerations to his head and face"
Lacerate - verb - Tear or make deep cuts in (flesh or skin). "the point had lacerated his neck"
Lacerate - verb - Criticize forcefully or severely. "her true venom seems reserved for the media itself as she lacerates our obsession with celebrity"
Clamorous - adjective - Making a loud and confused noise. "a jostling, clamorous mob"
Clamorous - adjective - Expressing or characterized by vehement protests or demands. "the clamorous radical wing of the party"
Venereal - adjective -relating to sexual desire or sexual intercourse. "the venereal act"
Amphtrack - noun - (military)A class of amphibious vehicles introduced in World War II.
Docile - adjective - Ready to accept control or instruction; submissive. "a cheap and docile workforce"
Clemency - noun - Mercy; lenience. "an appeal for clemency"
Panorama - noun - An unbroken view of the whole region surrounding an observer. "the tower offers a wonderful panorama of Prague"
Cavalier - adjective - Showing a lack of proper concern; offhand. "Anne was irritated by his cavalier attitude"
Epitaph - noun - A phrase or form of words written in memory of a person who has died, especially as an inscription on a tombstone. "a poignant epitaph to his creative career"
Epitaph - noun - Something by which a person, time, or event will be remembered. "the story makes a sorry epitaph to a great career"
Parsimonious - adjective - Very unwilling to spend money or use resources. "even the parsimonious Joe paid for drinks all round"
FACT: The ruling military junta changed the country's name from Burma to Myanmar in 1989, a year after thousands were killed in the suppression of an uprising. Rangoon also became Yangon. Capital city is Naypyidaw.
Tacit - adjective - Understood or implied without being stated. "your silence may be taken to mean tacit agreement"
Putative - adjective - Generally considered or reputed to be. "the putative father of her children"
Solace - noun - Comfort or consolation in a time of great distress or sadness. "she sought solace in her religion"
Conglomeration - noun - A number of different things, parts or items that are grouped together; collection. "a loose conglomeration of pieces"
Cessation - noun - The fact or process of ending or being brought to an end. "the cessation of hostilities"
Internecine - adjective - Destructive to both sides in a conflict. "the region's history of savage internecine warfare"
Reticent - adjective - Not revealing one's thoughts or feelings readily. "she was extremely reticent about her personal affairs"
Requiem - noun - (especially in the Roman Catholic Church) a Mass for the repose of the souls of the dead. "a requiem was held for the dead queen"
Requiem - noun - An act or token of remembrance. "he designed the epic as a requiem for his wife"
Tetchy - adjective - Irritable and bad-tempered. "she had always been tetchy and impatient with him"
Reciprocal - adjective - Given, felt, or done in return. "she was hoping for some reciprocal comment or gesture"
Reciprocal - adjective - (of an agreement or obligation) bearing on or binding each of two parties equally. "the treaty is a bilateral commitment with reciprocal rights and duties"
Unscrupulous - adjective - Having or showing no moral principles; not honest or fair. "unscrupulous landlords might be tempted to harass existing tenants"
Prohibitive - adjective - (of a law or rule) forbidding or restricting something. "prohibitive legislation"
Conurbation - noun - An extended urban area, typically consisting of several towns merging with the suburbs of a central city. "the major conurbations of London and Birmingham"
Mendacious - adjective - Not telling the truth; lying. "mendacious propaganda"
Verbiage - noun - Excessively lengthy or technical speech or writing. "the basic idea here, despite all the verbiage, is simple"
Derelict - adjective - In a very poor condition as a result of disuse and neglect. "a derelict Georgian mansion"
Arcane - adjective - Understood by few; mysterious or secret. "arcane procedures for electing people"
Ambivalence - noun - The state of having mixed feelings or contradictory ideas about something or someone. "the law's ambivalence about the importance of a victim's identity"
FACT: In the 16th Century tulips were brought to Holland from Turkey, and quickly became widely popular.
Latent - adjective - (of a quality or state) existing but not yet developed or manifest; hidden or concealed. "they have a huge reserve of latent talent"
Latent - adjective - (of a disease) not yet manifesting the usual symptoms. "diabetes may be latent for some years before diagnosis"
Laborious - adjective - Requiring considerable time and effort. "years of laborious training"
Laborious - adjective - (of speech or writing style) showing obvious signs of effort and lacking in fluency. "she wrote in laborious, dictionary-assisted English"
Askance - adverb - With an attitude or look of suspicion or disapproval. "the reformers looked askance at the mystical tradition"
Modicum - noun - A small quantity of a particular thing, especially something desirable or valuable. "his statement had a modicum of truth"
PROVERB: When the Russians "liberated" Poland from the Germans, the Poles said "A bird falls out of the sky into cowshit and is rescued by a cat", meaning not everyone who get you out of shit is a friend!
Fray - verb - (of a fabric, rope, or cord) unravel or become worn at the edge, typically through constant rubbing. "cheap fabric soon frays"
Epilogue - noun - A section or speech at the end of a book or play that serves as a comment on or a conclusion to what has happened. "a disastrous epilogue to the rest of his career"
Gavel - noun - A small hammer with which an auctioneer, a judge, or the chair of a meeting hits a surface to call for attention or order.
Carapace - noun - The hard upper shell of a tortoise, crustacean, or arachnid. "under her carapace of self-confidence she was very sensitive to criticism"
FACT: World war 2 lasted from September 1, 1939 – September 2, 1945.
Flaunt - verb - Display (something) ostentatiously, especially in order to provoke envy or admiration or to show defiance. "newly rich consumers eager to flaunt their prosperity"
Bereave - verb - Be deprived of a close relation or friend through their death. "she had recently been bereaved"
Goose-step - noun - A military marching step in which the legs are not bent at the knee.
Charade - noun - An absurd pretence intended to create a pleasant or respectable appearance. "talk of unity was nothing more than a charade"
Scruple - noun - A feeling of doubt or hesitation with regard to the morality or propriety of a course of action. "I had no scruples about eavesdropping" 
Hubristic - adjective - Excessively proud or self-confident. "a hubristic belief in his own self-proclaimed genius
Putrid - adjective - (of organic matter) decaying or rotting and emitting a fetid smell. "a butcher who sold putrid meat"
Festoon - noun - A chain or garland of flowers, leaves, or ribbons, hung in a curve as a decoration.
Ebullient - adjective - Cheerful and full of energy. "she sounded ebullient and happy"
Inundate - verb - Overwhelm (someone) with things or people to be dealt with. "we've been inundated with complaints from listeners"
Grandiloquent - adjective - Pompous or extravagant in language, style, or manner, especially in a way that is intended to impress. "a grandiloquent celebration of Spanish glory"
Intemperance - noun - Lack of moderation or restraint. "his occasional intemperance of tone"
Intemperance - noun - Excessive indulgence, especially in alcohol. "a warning about female intemperance"
Salient - adjective - Most noticeable or important. "it succinctly covered all the salient points of the case"
Timbre - noun - The character or quality of a musical sound or voice as distinct from its pitch and intensity. "trumpet mutes with different timbres"
Timbre - noun - The distinctive quality or character of someone or something. "you must demonstrate your moral timbre as a human being"
Pandemonium - noun - Wild and noisy disorder or confusion; uproar. "there was complete pandemonium—everyone just panicked"
Latrine - noun - A toilet, especially a communal one in a camp or barracks.
Supine - adjective - (of a person) lying face upwards.
Supine - adjective - Failing to act or protest as a result of moral weakness or indolence. "the government was supine in the face of racial injustice"
FACT: Abuja is the capital of Nigeria.
Vestigial - adjective - Forming a very small remnant of something that was once greater or more noticeable. "he felt a vestigial flicker of anger from last night"
FACT: Eva Anna Paula Hitler was the longtime companion of Adolf Hitler and, for less than 40 hours, his wife. Braun met Hitler in Munich when she was a 17-year-old assistant and model for his personal photographer.
Consternation - noun - A feeling of anxiety or dismay, typically at something unexpected. "to her consternation her car wouldn't start"
Fulsome - adjective - complimentary or flattering to an excessive degree."the press are embarrassingly fulsome in their appreciation"
Preen - verb - (of a bird) tidy and clean its feathers with its beak. "reed buntings preened at the pool's edge"
Preen - verb - (of a person) devote effort to making oneself look attractive and then admire one's appearance. "adolescents preening in their bedroom mirrors"
Preen - verb - Congratulate or pride oneself. "he's busy preening himself on acquiring such a pretty girlfriend"
Loquacious - adjective - Tending to talk a great deal; talkative. "never loquacious, Sarah was now totally lost for words"
FACT: Benito Mussolini was executed on the 28th of April towards the end of WW2 in northern Italy. Hitler killed himself by gunshot on 30 April 1945 in his Führerbunker in Berlin.
Facetious - adjective - Treating serious issues with deliberately inappropriate humour; flippant. "a facetious remark"
Obdurate - adjective - Stubbornly refusing to change one's opinion or course of action. "I argued this point with him, but he was obdurate"
In tandem - phrase - Alongside each other. "a tight fiscal policy working in tandem with a tight foreign exchange policy"
QUOTE: "Be grateful in spite of your suffering" - Jordan B. Peterson.
Apropos - adjective - Very appropriate to a particular situation. "the song feels apropos to a midnight jaunt"
Intractable - adjective - Hard to control or deal with. "intractable economic problems"
Intractable - adjective - (of a person) difficult or stubborn.
Corpus - noun - A collection of written texts, especially the entire works of a particular author or a body of writing on a particular subject. "the Darwinian corpus"
Anachronistic - adjective - Belonging to a period other than that being portrayed. "'Titus' benefits from the effective use of anachronistic elements like cars and loudspeakers"
Anachronistic - adjective - Belonging or appropriate to an earlier period, especially so as to seem conspicuously old-fashioned. "she is rebelling against the anachronistic morality of her parents"
Proclivity - noun - A tendency to choose or do something regularly; an inclination or predisposition towards a particular thing. "a proclivity for hard work"
Stratum - noun - A layer or a series of layers of rock in the ground. "a stratum of flint"
Stratum - noun - A level or class to which people are assigned according to their social status, education, or income. "members of other social strata"
PROVERB: When the aristocracy catches a cold, the working class dies of pneumonia.
Canny - adjective - Having or showing shrewdness and good judgement, especially in money or business matters. "canny investors will switch banks if they think they are getting a raw deal"
Deign - verb - Do something that one considers to be beneath one's dignity. "she did not deign to answer the maid's question"
Moult - verb - (of an animal) shed old feathers, hair, or skin to make way for a new growth. "the adult birds were already moulting"
Kinship - noun - Blood relationship.
Kinship - noun - A sharing of characteristics or origins. "they felt a kinship with architects"
FACT: 90% of communication occurs using just 500 words.
QUOTE: (Matthew 25:29), For whoever has will be given more, and they will have an abundance. Whoever does not have, even what they have will be taken from them.
Fractious - adjective - (typically of children) irritable and quarrelsome. "they fight and squabble like fractious children"
Fractious - adjective - (of a group or organization) difficult to control; unruly. "King Malcolm struggled to unite his fractious kingdom"
Propagate - verb - Breed specimens of (a plant or animal) by natural processes from the parent stock. "try propagating your own houseplants from cuttings"
Propagate - verb - Spread and promote (an idea, theory, etc.) widely. "the French propagated the idea that the English were drunkards"
QUOTE: "Here we must run as fast as we can, just to stay in place. And if you wish to go anywhere you must run twice as fast as that.” - Lewis Carroll, Alice in Wonderland.
Congenial - adjective - (of a person) pleasing or liked on account of having qualities or interests that are similar to one's own. "his need for some congenial company"
Benevolent - adjective - Well meaning and kindly. "he was something of a benevolent despot"
FACT: Women influence 83% of all consumer spending in U.S.
Temperament - noun - Person's or animal's nature, especially as it permanently affects their behaviour. "she had an artistic temperament"
Predisposition - noun - A liability or tendency to suffer from a particular condition, hold a particular attitude, or act in a particular way. "a child may inherit a predisposition to schizophrenia"
"If you can bite, you generally don't have to" - Jordan B. Peterson, 12 Rules for Life.
Finitude - noun - The state of having limits or bounds. "one quickly senses the finitude of his patience"
Dialysis - noun - The clinical purification of blood by dialysis, as a substitute for the normal function of the kidney.
Construe - verb - Interpret (a word or action) in a particular way. "his words could hardly be construed as an apology"
Androgyny - noun - Combination of masculine and feminine characteristics. Usually used to describe characters or persons who have no specific gender, 
Happenstance - noun - Coincidence "it was just happenstance that I happened to be there"
Quotidian - adjective - Of or occurring every day; daily. "the car sped noisily off through the quotidian traffic"
Assiduous - adjective - Showing great care and perseverance. "she was assiduous in pointing out every feature"
Arboreal - adjective - Living in trees. "arboreal rodents"
Juxtaposition - noun - The fact of two things being seen or placed close together with contrasting effect. "the juxtaposition of these two images"
Entropy - noun - Lack of order or predictability; gradual decline into disorder. "a marketplace where entropy reigns supreme"
QUOTE: "He whose life has a why can bear almost any how" - Friedrich Niezsche.
Brandish - verb - Wave or flourish (something, especially a weapon) as a threat or in anger or excitement. "a man leaped out brandishing a knife"
Leery - adjective - INFORMAL Cautious or wary due to realistic suspicions. "a city leery of gang violence"
Indelible - adjective - (of ink or a pen) making marks that cannot be removed. "an indelible marker pen"
Indelible - adjective - Not able to be forgotten. "the story made an indelible impression on me"
Furtive - adjective - Attempting to avoid notice or attention, typically because of guilt or a belief that discovery would lead to trouble; secretive. "they spent a furtive day together"
Telltale - adjective - Revealing, indicating, or betraying something. "the telltale bulge of a concealed weapon"
Nascent - adjective - (especially of a process or organization) just coming into existence and beginning to display signs of future potential. "the nascent space industry"
Indolent - adjective - Wanting to avoid activity or exertion; lazy. "they were indolent and addicted to a life of pleasure"
Aspersion - noun - An attack on the reputation or integrity of someone or something. "I don't think anyone is casting aspersions on you"
Salutary - adjective - (especially with reference to something unwelcome or unpleasant) producing good effects; beneficial. "it failed to draw salutary lessons from Britain's loss of its colonies"
Promiscuous - adjective - Having or characterized by many transient sexual relationships. "promiscuous teenagers"
Promiscuous - adjective - Demonstrating or implying an unselective approach; indiscriminate or casual. "the city fathers were promiscuous with their honours"
PROVERB: "People don't have ideas, ideas have people"
QUOTE: "A villain who despairs os his villainy has not become a hero. A hero is something positive not just the absence of evil" - Jordan B. Peterson.
QUOTE: "When well-meaning counselors place a delinquent teen among comparatively civilized peers. The delinquency spreads notsojourn the stability." - Jordan B. Peterson.
FACT: Carl Rogers, humanistic psychologist, believed it was impossible to start a therapeutic relationship if the person seeking help did not want to improve.
QUOTE: Rule 4: "Compare yourself to who you were yesterday not who someone else is today" - Jordan B. Peterson.
Impeccable - adjective - In accordance with the highest standards; faultless. "he had impeccable manners"
PROVERB: When you have something to say, silence is a lie.
Aphorism - noun - A pithy observation which contains a general truth. "the old aphorism ‘the child is father to the man’"
Axiomatic - adjective - Self-evident or unquestionable. "it is axiomatic that dividends have to be financed"
Ameliorate - verb - Make (something bad or unsatisfactory) better. "the reform did much to ameliorate living standards"
QUOTE: "To journey happily may well be better than to arrive successfully" - Jordan B. Peterson.
Proliferate - verb - Increase rapidly in number; multiply. "the science fiction magazines which proliferated in the 1920s"
Recalcitrant - adjective - Having an obstinately uncooperative attitude towards authority or discipline. "a class of recalcitrant fifteen-year-olds"
Aficionado - noun - A person who is very knowledgeable and enthusiastic about an activity, subject, or pastime. "a crossword aficionado"
Juxtapose - verb - Place or deal with close together for contrasting effect. "black-and-white photos of slums were starkly juxtaposed with colour images"
FACT: During World War II, Project Pigeon (later Project Orcon) was American behaviorist B. F. Skinner's attempt to develop pigeon-guided missile.
FACT: If a child has not been taught to behave properly by the age of four, it will be forever difficult for him or her to make friends.
Proxy - noun - The authority to represent someone else, especially in voting. "Britons overseas may register to vote by proxy"
QUOTE: "the human race isn't worth fighting for, only worth killing. Give the Earth back to the animals, they deserve it infinitely more than we do" - Eric Harris, Columbine school shooter.
Fact: Socrates was born in 470 BC in Athens. He died approx. at 71 in 399BC being sentenced to death by drinking poison.
Toil - verb - Work extremely hard or incessantly. "we toiled away"
Countenance - noun - A person's face or facial expression. "his impenetrable eyes and inscrutable countenance give little away"
Musing - noun - A period of reflection or thought. "his musings were interrupted by the sound of the telephone"
Muse - noun - A person or personified force who is the source of inspiration for a creative artist. "Yeats' muse, Maud Gonne"
Lord - verb - Act in a superior and domineering manner towards (someone). "when we were at school, you used to lord it over us"
Insurmountable - adjective - Too great to be overcome. "an insurmountable problem"
Opiate - noun - A thing which soothes or stupefies. "the capacity to use books as an opiate"
QUOTE: "Religion is the opium of the people" - German philosopher and economist Karl Marx.
QUOTE: "Cogito ergo sum " (I think, therefore I am) - René Descartes, French philosopher
FACT: A group of monkeys is called a troop.
QUOTE: "A sacrifice is something better that might be attained in the future by giving up something of value in the present" - Jordan B. Peterson
Licentious - adjective - Promiscuous and unprincipled in sexual matters. "the ruler's tyrannical and licentious behaviour"
FACT: Mount Everest is located in Nepal, Kathmandu is the capital of Nepal.
FACT: A Japanese haiku poem consists of three lines, with the first and last lines having 5 moras, and the middle line having 7 and the last with 5.
Emblematic - adjective - Serving as a symbol of a particular quality or concept; symbolic. "this case is emblematic of a larger problem"
FACT: Pietá is a work of Renaissance sculpture by Michelangelo Buonarroti, housed in St. Peter's Basilica, Vatican City. 
QUOTE: "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?" - Jesus Christ upon the cross.
Malice - noun - The desire to harm someone; ill will. "I bear no malice towards anybody"
Archetypal - adjective - Very typical of a certain kind of person or thing. "the archetypal country doctor"
Ambience - noun - The character and atmosphere of a place. "the relaxed ambience of the cocktail lounge is popular with guests"
Abeyance - noun - A state of temporary disuse or suspension. "matters were held in abeyance pending further enquiries"
Disused - adjective - No longer being used. "they held an exhibition in a disused warehouse"
Extraordinaire - adjective - Outstanding in a particular capacity. "the noted Hollywood middleman extraordinaire"
Desolation - noun - A state of complete emptiness or destruction. "the stony desolation of the desert"
Desolation - noun - Great unhappiness or loneliness. "in choked desolation, she watched him leave"
Sustenance - noun - Food and drink regarded as a source of strength; nourishment. "poor rural economies turned to potatoes for sustenance"
Sustenance - noun - The maintaining of someone or something in life or existence. "he kept two or three cows for the sustenance of his family"
Wondrous - adjective - Inspiring a feeling of wonder or delight; marvellous. "this wondrous city"
Amenable - adjective - Open and responsive to suggestion; easily persuaded or controlled. "parents who have amenable children"
Amenable - adjective - Capable of being acted upon in a particular way; susceptible. "cardiac failure not amenable to medical treatment"
FACT: "Arbeit macht frei" is a German phrase meaning "work sets you free". The slogan is known for appearing on the entrance of Auschwitz and other Nazi concentration camps.
Atonement - noun - The action of making amends for a wrong or injury. "he submitted his resignation as an act of atonement"
Perturbed - adjective - Anxious or unsettled; upset. "she didn't seem perturbed about the noises around her"
Patriarch - noun - The male head of a family or tribe.
Precipitously - adverb - Very steeply. "off the coast, the depth of the sea floor drops precipitously"
Precipitously - adverb - Hastily and without careful consideration. "several columnists criticized the government for acting precipitously"
Arbitrary - adjective - Based on random choice or personal whim, rather than any reason or system. "an arbitrary decision"
Arbitrary - adjective - (of power or a ruling body) unrestrained and autocratic in the use of authority. "a country under arbitrary government"
Pandora's box - noun - A process that once begun generates many complicated problems. "these policies might open a Pandora's box of inflationary wage claims"
Perdition - noun - (in Christian theology) a state of eternal punishment and damnation into which a sinful and unrepentant person passes after death.
Perdition - noun - Complete and utter ruin. "she used her last banknote to buy herself a square meal before perdition"
FACT: Volcano in Tanzania, Africa. Dodoma is the capital of Tanzania.
Omniscience - noun - The state of knowing everything. "the notion of divine omniscience"
Stratum - noun - A layer or a series of layers of rock in the ground. "a stratum of flint"
Stratum - noun - A level or class to which people are assigned according to their social status, education, or income. "members of other social strata"
Mutable - adjective - Liable to change. "the mutable nature of fashion"
Innocuous - adjective - Not harmful or offensive. "it was an innocuous question"
Collateral - noun - Something pledged as security for repayment of a loan, to be forfeited in the event of a default. "she put her house up as collateral for the bank loan"
Collateral - noun - A person having the same ancestor as another but through a different line.
FACT: Collateral damage is a general term for deaths, injuries, or other damage inflicted on an unintended target.
Judicious - adjective - Having, showing, or done with good judgement or sense. "the judicious use of public investment"
Frigid - adjective - Very cold in temperature. "frigid water"
Frigid - adjective - (of a woman) unable to be sexually aroused and responsive. "I've never been good at rejecting people, so I told him I was frigid"
Frigid - adjective - Stiff or formal in behaviour or style. "the frigid elegance of the new Opera Bastille"
Frenetic - adjective - Fast and energetic in a rather wild and uncontrolled way. "a frenetic pace of activity"
FACT: The Ouroboros is an ancient symbol depicting a serpent or dragon eating its own tail. It symbolizes the cyclic Nature of the Universe: creation out of destruction, Life out of Death.
Assiduous - adjective - Showing great care and perseverance. "she was assiduous in pointing out every feature"
Veritable - adjective - Used for emphasis, often to qualify a metaphor. "the early 1970s witnessed a veritable price explosion"
FACT: Children with a single parent families are twice as likely to commit suicide.
Canonical - adjective - According to or ordered by canon law. "the canonical rites of the Roman Church"
Canonical - adjective - Included in the list of sacred books officially accepted as genuine. "the canonical Gospels of the New Testament"
QUOTE: "Assume ignorance before malevolence" - Jordan B. Peterson, 12 Rules of Life.
QUOTE: "Don't be a girly man" - Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Polyamory - noun - The practice of engaging in multiple sexual relationships with the consent of all the people involved.
Nefarious - adjective - (typically of an action or activity) wicked or criminal. "the nefarious activities of the organized-crime syndicates"
Caustic - adjective - Able to burn or corrode organic tissue by chemical action. "a caustic cleaner"
Caustic - adjective - Sarcastic in a scathing and bitter way. "the players were making caustic comments about the refereeing"
Camaraderie - noun - Mutual trust and friendship among people who spend a lot of time together. "the enforced camaraderie of office life"
Connotation - noun - An idea or feeling which a word invokes for a person in addition to its literal or primary meaning. "the word ‘discipline’ has unhappy connotations of punishment and repression"
Peevish - adjective - Having or showing an irritable disposition. "a thin peevish voice"
Verboten - adjective - Forbidden, especially by an authority. "bank fishing is verboten on Strathbeg"
FACT: The "American Eskimo Dog" were originally called German Spitz, but due to anti-German sentiment during the First World War, it was renamed.
Hypoallergenic - adjective - (especially of cosmetics and textiles) relatively unlikely to cause an allergic reaction.
Moniker - noun - INFORMAL A name. "his real moniker is Dave Kennedy"
Depredation - noun - An act of attacking or plundering. "protecting grain from the depredations of rats and mice"meek
Meek - adjective - Quiet, gentle, and easily imposed on; submissive. "she brought her meek little husband along"
Hiatus - noun - A pause or break in continuity in a sequence or activity. "there was a brief hiatus in the war with France"
Palliative care - noun - Care for the terminally ill and their families, especially that provided by an organized health service.
Palliative - adjective - (of a medicine or medical care) relieving pain without dealing with the cause of the condition. "orthodox medicines tend to be palliative rather than curative"
Formication - noun - A sensation like insects crawling over the skin.
QUOTE: "Ask, and it shall be given to you; Seek, and ye shall find; Knock, and it shall be open unto you; For everyone who asks receives, the one who seeks find; and to one who knocks, the door will be open" (Matthew 7:7-7:8)
FACT: Tehran is the capital city of Iran. In 1943, Tehran was the site of the Tehran Conference, attended by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Soviet Premier Joseph Stalin, and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill to plan to overthrow Germany.
FACT: Giovanni Gentile (30 May 1875 – 15 April 1944) was an Italian philosopher, educator, and fascist politician. The self-styled "philosopher of Fascism", he was influential in providing an intellectual foundation for Italian Fascism.
Calumniate - verb - FORMAL Make false and defamatory statements about. "he has been calumniating the Crown and all the conservative decencies"
Quiescent - adjective - In a state or period of inactivity or dormancy. "strikes were headed by groups of workers who had previously been quiescent"
Allegory - noun - A story, poem, or picture that can be interpreted to reveal a hidden meaning, typically a moral or political one. "Pilgrim's Progress is an allegory of the spiritual journey"
Obstinate - adjective - Stubbornly refusing to change one's opinion or chosen course of action, despite attempts to persuade one to do so. "her obstinate determination to pursue a career in radio"
Obstinate - adjective - (of an unwelcome situation) very difficult to change or overcome. "the obstinate problem of unemployment"
Indefatigable - adjective - (of a person or their efforts) persisting tirelessly. "an indefatigable defender of human rights"
Tractable - adjective - (of a person) easy to control or influence. "she has always been tractable and obedient, even as a child"
Tractable - adjective - (of a situation or problem) easy to deal with. "trying to make the mathematics tractable"
Impromptu - adjective & adverb - Done without being planned or rehearsed. "an impromptu press conference"
Arresting - adjective - Striking; eye-catching. "at 6 ft 6 in he was an arresting figure"
Polemical - adjective - Of or involving strongly critical or disputatious writing or speech. "a polemical essay"
Vivacious - adjective - (especially of a woman) attractively lively and animated. "her vivacious and elegant mother"
Stratagem - noun - A plan or scheme, especially one used to outwit an opponent or achieve an end. "a series of devious stratagems"
Insoluble - adjective - Impossible to solve. "the problem is not insoluble"
Insoluble - adjective - (of a substance) incapable of being dissolved. "once dry, the paints become insoluble in water"
Haughty - adjective - Arrogantly superior and disdainful. "a look of haughty disdain"
Incumbent - adjective - Necessary for (someone) as a duty or responsibility. "the government realized that it was incumbent on them to act"
Incumbent - adjective - (of an official or regime) currently holding office. "the incumbent President was defeated"
Serene - adjective - Calm, peaceful, and untroubled; tranquil. "her eyes were closed and she looked very serene"
Equinox - noun - The time or date (twice each year) at which the sun crosses the celestial equator, when day and night are of equal length (about 22 September and 20 March).
FACT: The common name dandelion comes from the French dent de lion, or "lion's tooth".
Spiel - noun - INFORMAL An elaborate or glib speech or story, typically one used by a salesperson. "he delivers a breathless and effortless spiel in promotion of his new novel"
PROVERB: Fortune favours the bold
Ascetic - adjective - Characterized by severe self-discipline and abstention from all forms of indulgence, typically for religious reasons. "an ascetic life of prayer, fasting, and manual labour"
Divination - noun - The practice of seeking knowledge of the future or the unknown by supernatural means. "the Celtic art of divination"
Worldliness - noun - The quality of being experienced and sophisticated. "both display wisdom and worldliness of much older men"
Worldliness - noun - Concern with material values or ordinary life rather than a spiritual existence. "Chaucer drew attention to clerical avarice and worldliness"
Superlative - adjective - Of the highest quality or degree. "a superlative piece of skill"
Ignoble - adjective - Not honourable in character or purpose. "ignoble feelings of intense jealousy"
Garrulous - adjective - Excessively talkative, especially on trivial matters. "a garrulous cab driver"
Trivial - adjective - Of little value or importance. "huge fines were imposed for trivial offences"
Amiable - adjective - Having or displaying a friendly and pleasant manner. "the amiable young man greeted me enthusiastically"
Intrepid - adjective - Fearless; adventurous (often used for rhetorical or humorous effect). "our intrepid reporter"
Inaugurate - verb - Begin or introduce (a system, policy, or period). "he inaugurated a new policy of trade and exploration"
Inaugurate - verb - Admit (someone) formally to office.
Inaugurate - verb - Mark the beginning or first public use of (an organization or project) with a special event or ceremony. "the museum was inaugurated on September 12"
Vernacular - noun - The language or dialect spoken by the ordinary people of a country or region. "he wrote in the vernacular to reach a larger audience"
FACT: Cases of type 2 diabetes among adolescents in 1980: 0, in 2010 there were 57,638 .
FACT: 1 teaspoon = 4.2grams. American Heart Association's daily allowence of sugar is 6-9tsp. Average American takes 41tsps daily.
FACT: 43 cocaine addicted lab rats were given a choice between sugar water or cocaine water over a 15 day period. 40 out of the 43 rats chose the sugar.
Hyperpalatable - adjective - Loaded with fat, sugar, and salt so as to be irresistibly appealing.
Boisterous - adjective - Noisy, energetic, and cheerful. "a group of boisterous lads"
Boisterous - adjective - (of weather or water) wild or stormy. "the boisterous wind was lulled"
Portent - noun - A sign or warning that a momentous or calamitous event is likely to happen. "many birds are regarded as being portents of death"
Portent - noun - Future significance. "an omen of grave portent for the tribe"
Portentous - adjective - Of or like a portent; of momentous significance. "this portentous year in Canadian history"
Portentous - adjective - Done in a pompously or overly solemn manner so as to impress. "the author's portentous moralizings"
FACT: Pyongyang is the capital of North Korea.
Primogeniture - noun - The right of succession belonging to the firstborn child, especially the feudal rule by which the whole real estate of an intestate passed to the eldest son.
QUOTE: "One of the painful things about our time is that those who feel certainty are stupid, and those with any imagination and understanding are filled with doubt and indecision." - Bertrand Russell.
FACT: Modern chewing gum dates from the 1860s when it was popularized.
FACT: In 1492, the Ordmons and Kildare families met for a tense meeting in St Patrick's Cathedral. Sir James in fear, fled to the chapter room and bolted the door. After talking, a hole was cut in the door for James to shake hands. Origin of: "Chancing your arm".
Penury - noun - The state of being very poor; extreme poverty. "he couldn't face another year of penury"
Personable - adjective - (of a person) having a pleasant appearance and manner. "he was so personable and well-spoken.
Ruddy - adjective - (of a person's face) having a healthy red colour. "a cheerful pipe-smoking man of ruddy complexion"
Illustrious - adjective - Well known, respected, and admired for past achievements. "his illustrious predecessor"
Ultimatum - noun - A final demand or statement of terms, the rejection of which will result in retaliation or a breakdown in relations. "their employers issued an ultimatum demanding an immediate return to work"
Dissolute - adjective - (of a person or a way of life) overindulging in sensual pleasures. "unfortunately, his heir was feckless and dissolute"
Vindictive - adjective - Having or showing a strong or unreasoning desire for revenge. 4"the criticism was both vindictive and personalized"
Restitution - noun - The restoration of something lost or stolen to its proper owner. "the ANC had demanded the restitution of land seized from blacks"
Restitution - noun - Recompense for injury or loss. "he was ordered to pay £6,000 in restitution"
Dichotomy - noun - A division or contrast between two things that are or are represented as being opposed or entirely different. "a rigid dichotomy between science and mysticism"
FACT: Havana is the capital of Cuba.
Piquant - adjective - Having a pleasantly sharp taste or appetizing flavour. "a piquant tartare sauce"
Piquant - adjective - Pleasantly stimulating or exciting to the mind. "a particularly piquant story"
Convulse - verb - Suffer violent involuntary contraction of the muscles, producing contortion of the body or limbs. "she convulsed, collapsing to the floor with the pain"
Convulse - verb - Throw (a country) into violent social or political upheaval. "a wave of mass strikes convulsed the Ruhr, Berlin, and central Germany"
Clemency - noun - Mercy; lenience. "an appeal for clemency"
Alphanumeric - adjective - Consisting of or using both letters and numerals. "alphanumeric data"
Unremitting - adjective - Never relaxing or slackening; incessant. "unremitting drizzle"
QUOTE: "The almost unanimous voice of the people is with you, and, in a free country, the voice of the people must prevail." - Henry Grattan.
FACT Canberra is the capital of Australia.
POEM: "It was early in the spring, When small birds tune, and thrushes sing, Changing their notes from tree to tree, and the song they song was old Ireland free"
Unfurl - verb - Make or become spread out from a rolled or folded state, especially in order to be open to the wind. "a man was unfurling a sail"
Exasperate - verb - Irritate intensely; infuriate. "this futile process exasperates prison officers"
Fraternity - noun - A group of people sharing a common profession or interests. "members of the hunting fraternity"
Fraternity - noun - friendship and mutual support within a group. "the ideals of liberty, equality, and fraternity"
Martial law - noun - Military government, involving the suspension of ordinary law. "unlike the previous military interventions, the general did not declare martial law"
Tenure - noun - The conditions under which land or buildings are held or occupied.
Tenure - noun - The holding of an office. "his tenure of the premiership would be threatened"
Idolatrous - adjective - Relating to or practising idolatry; idol-worshipping. "idolatrous religions"
Idolatrous - adjective - Showing extreme admiration or reverence for something. "America's idolatrous worship of the auto"
Pertinacity - noun - The quality of sticking with something, no matter what. It's a type of persistent determination.
Supple - adjective - Bending and moving easily and gracefully; flexible. "her supple fingers"
Supple - adjective - Bending and moving easily and gracefully; flexible. "her supple fingers"
Lascivious - adjective - Feeling or revealing an overt sexual interest or desire. "he gave her a lascivious wink"
Rapturous - adjective - Characterized by, feeling, or expressing great pleasure or enthusiasm. "he was greeted with rapturous applause"
Benediction - noun - The utterance of a blessing, especially at the end of a religious service. "he said the benediction"
Benediction - noun - A prayer asking for divine blessing.
Inundation - noun - An overwhelming abundance of people or things. "an inundation of rugby fans"
Opulent - adjective - Ostentatiously costly and luxurious. "the opulent comfort of a limousine"
Squalor - noun - The state of being extremely dirty and unpleasant, especially as a result of poverty or neglect. "they lived in squalor and disease"
Tempestuous - adjective - Characterized by strong and turbulent or conflicting emotion. "he had a reckless and tempestuous streak"
Tempestuous - adjective - Very stormy. "a tempestuous wind"
Foist - verb - Impose an unwelcome or unnecessary person or thing on. "she had no desire to have an elderly relative foisted on her"
Jubilation - noun - A feeling of great happiness and triumph. "unbelievable scenes of jubilation"
Rapt - adjective - Completely fascinated or absorbed by what one is seeing or hearing. "a rapt teenage audience"
FACT: The word boycott originates from the name of Captain Charles C. Boycott (1832–97), an Irish land agent so treated in 1880, in an attempt instigated by the Irish Land League to get rents reduced during the Irish Land War.
Resolute - adjective - Admirably purposeful, determined, and unwavering. "he was resolute in his fight to uphold liberal values"
Torrent - noun - A strong and fast-moving stream of water or other liquid. "rain poured down in torrents"
Torrent - noun - An overwhelming outpouring of (something, typically words). "she was subjected to a torrent of abuse"
Filibuster - noun - An action such as prolonged speaking which obstructs progress in a legislative assembly in a way that does not technically contravene the required procedures.
FACT: 1.5 million of the Irish emigrated to America during the famine of the 1840's.
Vitriolic - adjective - Filled with bitter criticism or malice. "vitriolic attacks on the politicians"
Carouse - verb - Drink alcohol and enjoy oneself with others in a noisy, lively way. "they danced and caroused until the drink ran out"
Quorum - noun - The minimum number of members of an assembly or society that must be present at any of its meetings to make the proceedings of that meeting valid.
Seditious - adjective - Inciting or causing people to rebel against the authority of a state or monarch. "the letter was declared seditious"
Indomitable - adjective - Impossible to subdue or defeat. "a woman of indomitable spirit"
Resignation - noun - The acceptance of something undesirable but inevitable. "a shrug of resignation"
Profess - verb - Claim, often falsely, that one has (a quality or feeling). "he had professed his love for her only to walk away"
Profess - verb - Affirm one's faith in or allegiance to (a religion or set of beliefs). "a people professing Christianity"
Baleful - adjective - Threatening harm; menacing. "Bill shot a baleful glance in her direction"
Incognito - adjective & adverb - (of a person) having one's true identity concealed. "in order to observe you have to be incognito"
Soirée - noun - An evening party or gathering, typically in a private house, for conversation or music.
Stentorian - adjective - (of a person's voice) loud and powerful. "a stentorian roar"
Dejection - noun - A sad and depressed state; low spirits. "he was slumped in deep dejection"
FACT: By the 1840's almost half the population was dependent on the potato for sustenance
FACT: In 1845 the Irish blight was phytophthora infestans a microscopic fungus that spread by the wind and rain. The famine that followed kill 1 million of the population.
Expostulate - verb - Express strong disapproval or disagreement. "he found Fox expostulating with a young man"
Luxuriant - adjective - (of vegetation) rich and profuse in growth; lush. "forests of dark, luxuriant foliage"
Luxuriant - adjective - (of hair) thick and healthy. "she tossed her luxuriant dark hair"
Putrefy - verb - (of a body or other organic matter) decay or rot and produce a fetid smell. "the body was beginning to putrefy"
Fetid - adjective - Smelling extremely unpleasant. "the fetid water of the marsh"
Resplendent - adjective - Attractive and impressive through being richly colourful or sumptuous. "she was resplendent in a sea-green dress"
Dilatory - adjective - Slow to act. "he had been dilatory in appointing a solicitor"
Dilatory - adjective - Intended to cause delay. "they resorted to dilatory tactics, forcing a postponement of peace talks"
Insolence - noun - Rude and disrespectful behaviour. "she was sacked for insolence"
FACT: The Irish War of Independence was brought to an uneasy end with a Truce on July 11 1921 between the IRA and British forces. In the autumn of that year, negotiations began, which were to eventually result in the Anglo-Irish Treaty.
Indigent - adjective - Poor; needy. "a charity for the relief of indigent artists"
Invigorating - adjective - Making one feel strong, healthy, and full of energy. "a brisk, invigorating walk"
FACT: Men between 25-31 are 66% more likely to be living with their parents then woman.
Self-deprecating - adjective - Modest about or critical of oneself, especially humorously so. "self-deprecating jokes"
Sage - noun - (especially in ancient history or legend) a profoundly wise man. "the sayings of the numerous venerable sages"
Sage - adjective - Profoundly wise. "they nodded in agreement with these sage remarks"
Euphemism - noun - A mild or indirect word or expression substituted for one considered to be too harsh or blunt when referring to something unpleasant or embarrassing. "the jargon has given us ‘downsizing’ as a euphemism for cuts"
QUOTE: "Moms have the right to children, Dads have to fight for children" - Warren Farrell, The Boy Crisis.
Litigate - verb - Resort to legal action to settle a matter; be involved in a lawsuit. "the plaintiff is prepared to litigate"
Solicit - verb - Ask for or try to obtain (something) from someone. "he called a meeting to solicit their views"
Solicit - verb - Accost someone and offer one's or someone else's services as a prostitute. "although prostitution was not itself an offence, soliciting was"
Prima donna - noun - The chief female singer in an opera or opera company. "this solo was added to give the prima donna another aria"
Prima donna - noun - A very temperamental person with an inflated view of their own talent or importance.
Litigious - adjective - Tending or too ready to take legal action to settle disputes. "our increasingly litigious society"
THOUGHT: When doctors discover a new disease, one of the first steps in naming it.
FACT: Caracas is the captial of Venezuela.
FACT: Ikigai is a Japanese word whose meaning translates roughly to a reason for being.
FACT: In the UK and US 1 in 3 men grow up without a dad.
FACT: In China, they say yin sheng, yang shuai, which means female (yin) is on the wap up, while male (yang) is on the way up.
FACT: The unemployed man is twice as likely to commit suicide than the employed man.
FACT: 3/4 women wouldn't date an unemployed man where as for men, 2/3 said employment is not important.
FACT: The approximately 1.7 million truck drivers are predicted to lose their jobs with the arrival of self driving cars.
FACT: Everyday 150 people die from hazardous work conditions, 92% are male.
FACT: Men die more from 14 of the 15 leading causes of an early death.
QUOTE: "Being male is now the single largest demographic factor for early death" - Randolph Nesse.
Rudderless - adjective - Lacking a clear sense of one's aims or principles. "today's leadership is rudderless"
FACT: Between 20-24 years of age, suicide is 5-6 times more likely for men
Indigent - adjective - Poor; needy. "a charity for the relief of indigent artists"
Craven - adjective - Contemptibly lacking in courage; cowardly. "a craven abdication of his moral duty"
Prologue - noun - A separate introductory section of a literary, dramatic, or musical work. "the suppressed prologue to Women in Love"
Prologue - noun - An event or act that leads to another. "the events from 1945 to 1956 provided the prologue to the post-imperial era"
Acrimonious - adjective - (typically of speech or discussion) angry and bitter. "an acrimonious dispute about wages"
Holistic - adjective - PHILOSOPHY Characterized by the belief that the parts of something are intimately interconnected and explicable only by reference to the whole.
Holistic - adjective - MEDICINE Characterized by the treatment of the whole person, taking into account mental and social factors, rather than just the symptoms of a disease.
FACT: High blood sugar amplifies the negative effects of stress.
Sedentary - adjective - (of a person) tending to spend much time seated; somewhat inactive. "we all walk a certain amount every day even if we are sedentary"
Sedentary - adjective - (of work or a way of life) characterized by much sitting and little physical exercise. "a sedentary lifestyle spells bad news for hips and thighs"
Sedentary - adjective - (of a position) sitting; seated. "he spoke from a sedentary position"
Alexithymia - noun - Is a personality construct characterized by the subclinical inability to identify and describe emotions in the self. The core characteristics of alexithymia are marked dysfunction in emotional awareness, social attachment, and interpersonal relating.
FACT: Wellington is the capital of New Zealand.
FACT: Men are 24 times more likely to get shot by police than women.
Metabolic - adjective - Relating to or deriving from the metabolism of a living organism. "a metabolic disorder"
Numismatics - noun - The study or collection of currency, including coins, tokens, paper money, and related objects.
Tarnish - verb - Lose or cause to lose lustre, especially as a result of exposure to air or moisture. "silver tarnishes too easily"
Tarnish - verb - Make or become less valuable or respected. "his regime had not been tarnished by human rights abuses"
Trove - noun - A store of valuable or delightful things. "the cellar contained a trove of rare wines"
Cadence - noun - A modulation or inflection of the voice. "the measured cadences that he employed in the Senate"
Flagrant - adjective - (of an action considered wrong or immoral) conspicuously or obviously offensive. "a flagrant violation of the law"
Concatenation - noun - A series of interconnected things. "a concatenation of events which had finally led to the murder"
Concatenation - noun - The action of linking things together in a series, or the condition of being linked in such a way "the concatenation of lists"
FACT: In ancient Greek philosophy, there exists Ship of Theseus paradox. The Athenians put in new timber when parts of the ship that had decayed. Yet was this not the same ship of Theseus even when it consisted of none of the materials in which he has sailed?
Focal point - noun - The centre of interest or activity. "the community shop is the focal point of the village"
QUOTE: "There is no great genious without a touch of madness" - Aristotle.
Intravenous - adjective - Existing or taking place within, or administered into, a vein or veins. "an intravenous drip"
PROVERB: (FROM CHINESE MEDICINE) Works will not eat living wood where the vital sap is flowing, rust will not hinder the opening of a gate when the hinges are used each day. Movement gives health and life. Stagnation brings disease and death.
Self-abnegation - noun - The denial or abasement of oneself. "she turned the letter into a grovelling form of self-abnegation"
Seismic - adjective - Relating to earthquakes or other vibrations of the earth and its crust. "after a few days of seismic activity the volcanic eruption started"
Seismic - adjective - Of enormous proportions or effect. "there are seismic pressures threatening American society"
Grimace - noun - An ugly, twisted expression on a person's face, typically expressing disgust, pain, or wry amusement. "she gave a grimace of pain"
Propitious - adjective - Giving or indicating a good chance of success; favourable. "the timing for such a meeting seemed propitious"
Astringent - adjective - Causing the contraction of skin cells and other body tissues. "an astringent skin lotion"
Astringent - adjective - Sharp or severe in manner or style. "her astringent words had their effect"
FACT: A boat set out on bad seas from Morocco to Spain. The Cameroon Muslim captain blamed the weather on a Christian pastor who was praying. The captain and crew beat him and threw him overboard before identifying the other Christians, beating and throwing them overboard.
Inflammatory - adjective - (especially of speech or writing) arousing or intended to arouse angry or violent feelings. "inflammatory remarks"
FACT: A 2016 survey says 52% of British Muslims thought homosexuality should be illegal.
FACT: A gallup survey in 2009 found that 0% of British Muslims interviewed (of 500) thought homosexuality was morally acceptable.
Staid - adjective - Sedate, respectable, and unadventurous. "staid law firms"
Sedate - adjective - Calm, dignified, and unhurried. "in the old days, business was carried on at a rather more sedate pace"
Sedate - adjective - Quiet and rather dull. "sedate suburban domesticity"
Eminence - noun - Fame or acknowledged superiority within a particular sphere. "her eminence in cinematography"
Eminence - noun - An important or distinguished person. "the Lord Chancellor canvassed the views of various legal eminences"
Legion - noun - A vast number of people or things. "legions of photographers and TV cameras"
Rationale - noun - A set of reasons or a logical basis for a course of action or belief. "he explained the rationale behind the change"
Technocracy - noun - The government or control of society or industry by an elite of technical experts. "failure in the war on poverty discredited technocracy"
Pyre - noun - A heap of combustible material, especially one for burning a corpse as part of a funeral ceremony.
Puerile - adjective - Childishly silly and immature. "a puerile argument"
Diatribe - noun - A forceful and bitter verbal attack against someone or something. "a diatribe against consumerism"
Echelon - noun - A level or rank in an organization, a profession, or society. "the upper echelons of the business world"
Etiquette - noun - Rhe customary code of polite behaviour in society or among members of a particular profession or group. "the rules of etiquette are changing"
FACT: The Pareto principle (also known as the 80/20 rule, the law of the vital few, or the principle of factor sparsity) states that, for many events, roughly 80% of the effects come from 20% of the causes.
Masochism - noun - The tendency to derive sexual gratification from one's own pain or humiliation. "with things such as bondage and masochism, it's all right if you both go for it"
Masochism - noun - (in general use) the enjoyment of an activity that appears to be painful or tedious. "there's plenty to do when the weather turns moorland walks into exercises in masochism"
Adjudicate - verb - Make a formal judgement on a disputed matter. "the Committee adjudicates on all betting disputes"
Adjudicate - verb - Act as a judge in a competition. "we asked him to adjudicate at the local flower show"
Disputatious - adjective - Fond of having heated arguments. "it's a congenial hang-out for disputatious academics"
Mania - noun - Mental illness marked by periods of great excitement or euphoria, delusions, and overactivity. "many people suffering from mania do not think anything is wrong"
Mania - noun - An excessive enthusiasm or desire; an obsession. "he had a mania for automobiles"
Mawkish - adjective - Sentimental in an exaggerated or false way. "a mawkish ode to parenthood"
Jubilant - adjective - Feeling or expressing great happiness and triumph. "a large number of jubilant fans ran on to the pitch"
Vitriol - noun - Bitter criticism or malice. "her mother's sudden gush of fury and vitriol"
Encumbrance - noun - An impediment or burden. "the horse raised its hind leg as if to rid itself of an encumbrance"
FACT: Another Place is a piece of modern sculpture by Sir Antony Gormley located at Crosby Beach in Liverpool City Region, England. It consists of 100 cast iron figures facing towards the sea.
Predicate - noun - Found or base something on. "the theory of structure on which later chemistry was predicated"
Pliant - adjective - Easily bent. "pliant willow stems"
Pliant - adjective - Easily influenced or directed; yielding. "a more pliant prime minister"
Casuistry - noun - The use of clever but unsound reasoning, especially in relation to moral questions; sophistry. "the minister is engaging in nothing more or less than casuistry"
Volition - noun - The faculty or power of using one's will. "without conscious volition she backed into her office"
Elusive - adjective - Difficult to find, catch, or achieve. "success will become ever more elusive"
Elusive - adjective - Difficult to remember. "the elusive thought he had had moments before"
FACT: The word 'Resilience' comes from Latin 'resilio' meaning to bounce back.
FACT: The prefrontal cortex (PFC) is the cerebral cortex which covers the front part of the frontal lobe. This brain region has been implicated in planning complex cognitive behavior, personality expression, decision making, and moderating social behaviour.
FACT: The limbic system of the brain, supports a variety of functions including emotion, behavior, motivation, long-term memory, and olfaction.
Hedonic adaption - noun - The tendency of humans to quickly return to a relatively stable level of happiness despite major positive or negative events or life changes.
QUOTE: "Men are disturbed not by things, but by the views which they take of things." Epictetus, Ancient Greek philosopher.
Gamut - noun - The complete range or scope of something. "the whole gamut of human emotion"
Kilter - noun - Out of harmony or balance. "daylight saving throws everybody's body clock out of kilter"
Kangaroo court - noun - An unofficial court held by a group of people in order to try someone regarded, especially without good evidence, as guilty of a crime or misdemeanour. "they conducted a kangaroo court there and then"
Pangea - noun - A hypothetical supercontinent that included all current land masses, believed to have been in existence before the continents broke apart during the Triassic and Jurassic Periods.
FACT: The capital of Zimbabwe is Harare.
FACT: Homo sapien means 'Wise men'.
FACT: The Big Bang took place approximately 13.5 billion years ago.
QUOTE: "Three things cannot be hidden long: The sun, the moon and the truth" - Buddha.
QUOTE: "Let food be thy medicine and medicine be thy food" - Hippocrates.
Inane - adjective - Lacking sense or meaning; silly. "don't badger people with inane questions"
Fraught - adjective - (of a situation or course of action) filled with (something undesirable). "marketing any new product is fraught with danger"
Fraught - adjective - Causing or affected by anxiety or stress. "there was a fraught silence"
Pithy - adjective - (of language or style) terse and vigorously expressive. "his characteristically pithy comments"
FACT: 1 pound is equal to kilograms is equal to 0.45 kilograms.
PROVERB: "Do I work to live or live to work"
Dearth - noun - A scarcity or lack of something. "there is a dearth of evidence"
Ruminate - verb - Think deeply about something. "we sat ruminating on the nature of existence"
Avoidant - adjective - PSYCHOLOGY Relating to or denoting a type of personality or behaviour characterized by the avoidance of intimacy or social interaction. "he was also anxious, avoidant, and unable to manage conflict"
Snide - adjective - Derogatory or mocking in an indirect way. "snide remarks about my mother"
Deprecatory - adjective - Expressing disapproval; disapproving.
Enamour - verb - Be filled with love for. "it is not difficult to see why Edward is enamoured of her"
Atrophy - verb - (of body tissue or an organ) waste away, especially as a result of the degeneration of cells, or become vestigial during evolution. "the calf muscles will atrophy"
Atrophy - verb - Gradually decline in effectiveness or vigour due to underuse or neglect. "the imagination can atrophy from lack of use"
Rupture - verb - (especially of a pipe or container, or bodily part such as an organ or membrane) break or burst suddenly. "if the main artery ruptures he could die"
Rupture - verb - Breach or disturb (a harmonious feeling or situation). "once trust and confidence has been ruptured it can be difficult to regain"
FACT: According to British Anthropologist, Robin Dunbar, humans can comfortably maintain only 150 stable relationships.
Rorschach test - noun - PSYCHOLOGY A set of symmetrical ink blots of different shapes and colours is presented one by one to the subject, who is asked to describe what they suggest or resemble.  The test is named after its creator, Swiss psychologist Hermann Rorschach.
FACT: Undeniable evidence of domesticated dogs from 15,000 years ago. Dog was the first animal to be domesticated be humans.
Incontrovertible - adjective - Not able to be denied or disputed. "incontrovertible proof"
Big Freeze - noun - A hypothetical scenario where the universe continues to expand forever and eventually all matter reaches a final uniform state of absolute 0 temperature. Time will lose all meaning because there will be no events of any kind.
Inclement - adjective - (of the weather) unpleasantly cold or wet. "walkers should be prepared for inclement weather"
Malign - verb - Speak about (someone) in a spitefully critical manner. "don't you dare malign her in my presence"
FACT: On July 4th 1776, Congress approved the final text of the Declaration of Independence.
Contentious - adjective - Causing or likely to cause an argument; controversial. "a contentious issue"
Contentious - adjective - Involving heated argument. "the socio-economic plan had been the subject of contentious debate"
Herald - noun - A person or thing viewed as a sign that something is about to happen. "they considered the first primroses as the herald of spring"
Herald - verb - Be a sign that (something) is about to happen. "the speech heralded a change in policy"
Marsupial - noun - A mammal of an order whose members are born incompletely developed and are typically carried and suckled in a pouch on the mother's belly. Marsupials are found chiefly in Australia and New Guinea, and also in America.
Menagerie - noun - A collection of wild animals kept in captivity for exhibition.
Menagerie - noun - A strange or diverse collection of people or things. "some other specimen in the television menagerie"
Spartan - adjective - Showing or characterized by austerity or a lack of comfort or luxury. "the accommodation was fairly spartan"
Prerogative - noun - A right or privilege exclusive to a particular individual or class. "in some countries, higher education is predominantly the prerogative of the rich"
QUOTE: The native Aztecs of Mexico questioned Hernán Cortes and his Spanish conquistadors about their obsession with gold, he replied: "I and my companions suffer from a disease of the heart that can be cured only with gold"
Reciprocity - noun - The practice of exchanging things with others for mutual benefit, especially privileges granted by one country or organization to another. "the Community intends to start discussions on reciprocity with third countries"
Insolvent - adjective - Unable to pay debts owed. "the company became insolvent"
PROVERB: (From China) Don't waste good iron for nails or good men for soldiers.
FACT: Breeds are different varieties of domestic animals of the same species. A species is usually defined as a group of animals that can interbreed and produce fertile offspring.
FACT: A mule is a cross between a donkey jack and a horse mare.
FACT: After the dinosaurs became extinct there was a lot of free land. Many aerial animals began to adjust to land life. Evolution took its course, over time and ostriches gained in size and lost their ability to fly.
Tapestry - noun - A piece of thick textile fabric with pictures or designs formed by weaving coloured weft threads or by embroidering on canvas, used as a wall hanging or soft furnishing. "panelled walls hung with old tapestries"
Tapestry - noun - Used in reference to an intricate or complex sequence of events. "the loopiness of the Commons adds to life's rich tapestry"
Enviable - adjective - Arousing or likely to arouse envy. "the firm is in the enviable position of having a full order book"
FACT: Marie Curie, one of the discoverers of radioactivity, died of aplastic anemia from overexposure to radioactivity from her studying.
FACT: The bouba/kiki effect is a mapping between speech sounds and the visual shape of objects. The effect was first observed by psychologist Wolfgang Köhler. 98% assosiate kiki to a pointy object and bouba to a round splash.
FACT: The  Ancient Library of Alexandria in Alexandria, Egypt, was one of the largest and most significant libraries of the ancient world. The library was burned down accidentally by Julius Caesar in 48BC. 
FACT: The circumference of the earth is 40,075km.
Oxymoron - noun - A figure of speech in which apparently contradictory terms appear in conjunction (e.g. faith unfaithful kept him falsely true ).
FACT: If two animals can breed and create a fertile offspring, they are a breed. A horse and a donkey can produce a mule that is infertile, so a horse is a different species to a donkey.
FACT: The Roman Empire used a coin called denarius, the denarius became a generic name for a coin. Muslims Arabicised the name and issues 'dinars', still the official name of currency in Jordan, Iraq, Serbia, Macedonia, Tunisia and others.
Apogee - noun - The highest point in the development of something; a climax or culmination. "a film which was the apogee of German expressionist cinema"
FACT: Don Quixote was written by Miguel de Cervantes.
Xenophobia - noun - Dislike of or prejudice against people from other countries. "racism and xenophobia are steadily growing in Europe"
Fecundity - noun - The ability to produce an abundance of offspring or new growth; fertility. "multiply mated females show increased fecundity"
Fecundity - noun - The ability to produce many new ideas. "the immense fecundity of his imagination made a profound impact on European literature"
Succour - noun - Assistance and support in times of hardship and distress. "the wounded had little chance of succour"
QUOTE: "The person who attempts to fight the iron logic of nature thereby fights the principles he must thank for his life as a human being. To fight against nature is to bring about one's own destruction" - Hitler, from Mein Kampf.
The psychologist's fallacy - noun - A fallacy that occurs when an observer assumes that his or her subjective experience reflects the true nature of an event.
Variegated - adjective - Exhibiting different colours, especially as irregular patches or streaks. "variegated yellow bricks"
Variegated - adjective - Marked by variety. "his variegated and amusing observations"
Arms race - noun - A competition between nations for superiority in the development and accumulation of weapons. "an escalation of the arms race between NATO and the Warsaw Pact"
Ex post facto - adjective & adverb - With retrospective action or force. "ex post facto laws"
FACT: At 5:29:45, July 16 1945, the first atomic bomb was detonated.
Quandary - noun - A state of perplexity or uncertainty over what to do in a difficult situation. "Kate was in a quandary"
Quandary - noun - A difficult situation; a practical dilemma. "a legal quandary"
FACT: On the 20th of July 1969, Neil Armstrong and pilot Buzz Aldrin, landed the lunar module Eagle.
FACT: In 1831, the Royal Navy sent a ship to map  the coast of South America. The captain decided to add a geologist to the expedition, after several professionals refused, a 22 y/o Charles Darwin accepted. The empirical data collected eventually became the theory of evolution.
FACT: The Great Famine was from September 1845 – 1852.
FACT: The First Opium War (1840-1842), Britain made fortunes exporting opium to China, making millions addicts. The Chinese government issued a ban on drug trafficking and Britain declared war on China in the name of 'free trade'.
FACT: After the First Opium War, Britain defeated China and took control of Hong Kong until 1997.
Harbinger - noun - A person or thing that announces or signals the approach of another. "witch hazels are the harbingers of spring"
Aberration - noun - A departure from what is normal, usual, or expected, typically an unwelcome one. "they described the outbreak of violence in the area as an aberration"
PROVERB: "a fly in the ointment" A minor irritation that spoils the success or enjoyment of something.
QUOTE: "Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that." - Martin Luther King Jr.
FACT: America is named after Amerigo Vespucci, an Italian explorer who set forth that the lands Christopher Columbus sailed to in 1492 were part of a separate continent. A map drawer named them after Amerigo, erroneously thinking he discovered it. 
FACT: On October 12th 1492, at about 2am, Juan Rodriguez Bermejo of the Pinta spotted what we now call the Bahamas and shouted "Land! Land!".
FACT: In 1492, Columbus discovers the Bahamas. Cortés landed in Mexico in 1519 discovering the Aztec civilization. Francisco Pizarro discovered the Inca Empire.
Anathema - noun - Something or someone that one vehemently dislikes. "racial hatred was anathema to her"
Stolid - adjective - Calm, dependable, and showing little emotion or animation. "a stolid bourgeois gent"
Inculcate - verb - Instil (an idea, attitude, or habit) by persistent instruction. "I tried to inculcate in my pupils an attitude of enquiry"
Inculcate - verb - Teach (someone) an attitude, idea, or habit by persistent instruction. "they will try to inculcate you with a respect for culture"
Shrewd - adjective - Having or showing sharp powers of judgment; astute. "she was shrewd enough to guess the motive behind his gesture"
Abominable - adjective - Causing moral revulsion. "the uprising was suppressed with abominable cruelty"
Impecunious - adjective - Having little or no money. "a titled but impecunious family"
QUOTE: "All that I feel to be good is good; all that I feel to be bad is bad" - Jean-Jacques Rousseau.
Palatial - adjective - Resembling a palace in being spacious and splendid. "her palatial apartment in Mayfair"
FACT: Aluminum was discovered in the 1820's, but separating the metal from its ore was costly. For decades aluminum was more expensive than gold. In the 1860's the emperor France had aluminum cutlery for his distinguished guests. Less important visitors had gold knives and forks.  
Mainstay - noun - Someone or something on which something else is based or relies. "whitefish are the mainstay of the local industry"
FACT: Some sharks must keep swimming in order to breath.
Perpetuum mobile - noun - A state in which movement or action is or appears to be continuous and unceasing. "the planet is in perpetual motion"
Perpetual motion - noun - A state in which movement or action is or appears to be continuous and unceasing. "the planet is in perpetual motion"
Immemorial - adjective - Originating in the distant past; very old. "an immemorial custom"
Sober - verb - Make or become more serious, sensible, and solemn. "his expression sobered her"
Diametrically - adverb - (with reference to opposition) completely; directly. "two diametrically opposed viewpoints"
Drudgery - noun - Hard menial or dull work. "domestic drudgery"
Buoyant - adjective - Cheerful and optimistic. "the conference ended with the party in a buoyant mood"
FACT: On 1st January 1818, Mary Shelley published Frankenstein.
Lore - noun - A body of traditions and knowledge on a subject or held by a particular group, typically passed from person to person by word of mouth. "the jinns of Arabian lore"
FACT: It is speculated that giraffes may have evolved with long necks due to competition for food.
FACT: At the entrance of the temple of Apollo in Greece, pilgrims are greeted with inscription 'Know Thyself'
FACT: Paper money was first used in China during the Tang Dynasty (AD 618-907).
FACT: Damascus is the capital of Syria.
Stark - adjective - Severe or bare in appearance or outline. "the ridge formed a stark silhouette against the sky"
Stark - adjective - Unpleasantly or sharply clear. "his position is in stark contrast to that of Curran"
Mnemonic - noun - A system such as a pattern of letters, ideas, or associations which assists in remembering something. "the usual mnemonic for star types is O Be A Fine Girl Kiss Me"
Invective - noun - Insulting, abusive, or highly critical language. "he let out a stream of invective"
Customs union - noun - A group of states that have agreed to charge the same import duties as each other and usually to allow free trade between themselves.
Éminence grise - noun - A person who exercises power or influence in a certain sphere without holding an official position. "for years he has been an éminence grise operating in the shadows of party policy-making"
Antagonism - noun - Active hostility or opposition. "the antagonism between them"
FACT: Bratislava is the capital of Slovakia.
Mystify - verb - Utterly bewilder or perplex (someone). "I was completely mystified by his disappearance"
Glib - adjective - (of words or a speaker) fluent but insincere and shallow. "the glib phrases soon roll off the tongue"
Sanguine - adjective - Optimistic or positive, especially in an apparently bad or difficult situation. "he is sanguine about prospects for the global economy"
FACT: Ireland exports 90% of its food produce.
Pedigree - noun - The record of descent of an animal, showing it to be pure-bred. "they are looking for animals with pedigrees"
Pedigree - noun - The recorded ancestry or lineage of a person or family. "with a pedigree equal to many of the gentry"
Effusive - adjective - Showing or expressing gratitude, pleasure, or approval in an unrestrained or heartfelt manner. "an effusive welcome"
Emotive - adjective - Arousing or able to arouse intense feeling. "animal experimentation is an emotive subject"
Emotive - adjective - Expressing a person's feelings rather than being neutrally descriptive. "the comparisons are emotive rather than analytic"
Emollient - adjective - Having the quality of softening or soothing the skin. "a rich emollient shampoo"
Emollient - adjective - Attempting to avoid confrontation or anger; calming or conciliatory. "the president's emollient approach to differences"
PROVERB: (From China) He that takes medicine and neglects diet, wastes time of his doctor.
Idyll - noun - An extremely happy, peaceful, or picturesque period or situation, typically an idealized or unsustainable one. "the rural idyll remains strongly evocative in most industrialized societies"
FACT: Baileys was created in 1974.
QUOTE: "First they ignore you, then they laugh at you, then they fight you, then you win" - Mahatma Gandhi.
Crucible - noun - A ceramic or metal container in which metals or other substances may be melted or subjected to very high temperatures. "the crucible tipped and the mould filled with liquid metal"
Crucible - noun - A situation of severe trial, or in which different elements interact, leading to the creation of something new. "their relationship was forged in the crucible of war"
Affinity - noun - A natural liking for and understanding of someone or something. "he had a special affinity with horses"
FACT: Islamabad is the capital of Pakistan.
Nondescript - adjective - Lacking distinctive or interesting features or characteristics. "she lived in a nondescript suburban apartment block"
Pittance - noun - A very small or inadequate amount of money. "he paid his workers a pittance"
Iconoclastic - adjective - Criticizing or attacking cherished beliefs or institutions. "an iconoclastic filmmaker who has pushed the boundaries with every film he's made"
Bonanza - noun - A situation which creates a sudden increase in wealth, good fortune, or profits. "a natural gas bonanza for Britain"
Bonanza - noun - A large amount of something desirable. "the festive feature-film bonanza"
FACT: The first animals were probably Jellyfish and sponges.
FACT: Asunción is the capital and largest city of Paraguay.
FACT: The Earth is thought to have been formed about 4.6 billion years ago by collisions in the giant disc-shaped cloud of material that also formed the Sun
Mesozoic Era - noun - An interval of geological time from about 252 to 66 million years ago. The era is subdivided into three major periods: the Triassic, Jurassic, and Cretaceous.
Coprolite - noun - Fossilized feces.
Noxious - adjective - Harmful, poisonous, or very unpleasant. "they were overcome by the noxious fumes"
FACT: Nuuk is the capital of Greenland.
Primeval - adjective - Of the earliest time in history. "mile after mile of primeval forest"
Primeval - adjective - (of emotion or behaviour) strongly instinctive and unreasoning. "a primeval desire"
Finesse - noun - Impressive delicacy and skill. "orchestral playing of great finesse"
Parlance - noun - A particular way of speaking or using words, especially a way common to those with a particular job or interest. "dated terms that were once in common parlance"
Cavernous - adjective - Like a cavern in size, shape, or atmosphere. "a dismal cavernous hall"
Cavernous - adjective - Giving the impression of vast, dark depths. "his cavernous eyes"
Hedonistic - adjective - Engaged in the pursuit of pleasure; sensually self-indulgent. "a hedonistic existence of booze, drugs, and parties"
Verdant - adjective - (of countryside) green with grass or other rich vegetation. "verdant valleys"
Verdant - adjective - Of the bright green colour of lush grass. "a deep, verdant green"
FACT: Jack Horner (June 15, 1946) is an American paleontologist most famous for discovering & naming Maiasaura, providing the first clear evidence that some dinosaurs cared for their young. Horner served as the technical advisor for all the Jurassic Park films & a cameo appearance in Jurassic World.
Vigil - noun - A period of keeping awake during the time usually spent asleep, especially to keep watch or pray. "my birdwatching vigils lasted for hours"
Motif - noun - A decorative image or design, especially a repeated one forming a pattern. "the colourful hand-painted motifs which adorn narrowboats"
Motif - noun - A dominant or recurring idea in an artistic work. "superstition is a recurring motif in the book"
Niche differentiation/niche partitioning - noun -  In the field of ecology, refers to the process by which competing species use the environment differently in a way that helps them to coexist.
QUOTE: "Europe belongs to the Europeans" - Dalai Lama, also suggesting refugees return to native countries.
Duplicitous - adjective - Deceitful. "a duplicitous philanderer"
FACT: 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue is the formal address of the White House, the United States presidential residence.
Feral - adjective - (especially of an animal) in a wild state, especially after escape from captivity or domestication. "a feral cat"
Tumultuous - adjective - Making an uproar or loud, confused noise. "tumultuous applause"
Tumultuous - adjective - Excited, confused, or disorderly. "a tumultuous crowd"
Raconteur - noun - A person who tells anecdotes in a skillful and amusing way. "a colourful raconteur"
FACT: The Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, of some three-quarters of the plant and animal species on Earth, approximately 66 million years ago. 
FACT: The impact hypothesis, was bolstered by the discovery of the 180-kilometre-wide (112 mi) Chicxulub crater in the Gulf of Mexico, Yucatán, in the early 1990s.
Coup de grâce - noun - A final blow or shot given to kill a wounded person or animal. "he administered the coup de grâce with a knife"
Coup de grâce - noun - An action or event that serves as the culmination of a bad or deteriorating situation. "Howarth delivered the coup de grâce with a penalty two minutes from time"
FACT: Panthalassa, also known as the Panthalassic or Panthalassan Ocean, was the superocean that surrounded the supercontinent Pangaea.
PROVERB: Absence of evidence is not always evidence of absence.
FACT: Santa Fe is the capital of the U.S. state of New Mexico.
Frantic - adjective - Distraught with fear, anxiety, or other emotion. "she was frantic with worry"
Frantic - adjective - Conducted in a hurried, excited, and disorganized way. "frantic attempts to resuscitate the girl"
Lithe - adjective - (especially of a person's body) thin, supple, and graceful. "she lay gazing up at his tall, lithe figure"
FACT: Honey is the only food that doesn't spoil.
Machismo - noun - Strong or aggressive masculine pride. "the exaggerated machismo displayed in the tango"
FACT: "I am" is the shortest sentance in the English language.
Subversive - adjective - Seeking or intended to subvert an established system or institution. "subversive literature"
Smoking gun - noun - A piece of incontrovertible incriminating evidence. "the trial's long-awaited smoking gun failed to surface"
FACT: Both Charles Darwin & Albert Einstein married their first cousins.
Iridescent - adjective - Showing luminous colours that seem to change when seen from different angles. "the drake's head has an iridescent purple sheen"
Repertoire - noun - A stock of plays, dances, or items that a company or a performer knows or is prepared to perform.
Repertoire - noun - The whole body of items which are regularly performed. "the mainstream concert repertoire"
Repertoire - noun - A stock of skills or types of behaviour that a person habitually uses. "his repertoire of denigratory gestures"
FACT: The Sea Organ is an architectural sound art object located in Zadar, Croatia and an experimental musical instrument, which plays music by way of sea waves and tubes located underneath a set of large marble steps.
Panoply - noun - An extensive or impressive collection. "a deliciously inventive panoply of insults"
Panoply - noun - A splendid display. "I leaned forward to take in the full panoply of tourist London"
FACT: The Mesozoic Era was the time from 248 million to 65 million years ago. It is divided into three periods, the Triassic, the Jurassic, and the Cretaceous.
Fusty - adjective - Smelling stale, damp, or stuffy. "the fusty odour of decay"
Fusty - adjective - Old-fashioned in attitude or style. "grammar in the classroom became a fusty notion"
FACT: The Nile Crocodile has the strongest bite of any living creature.
Keratin - noun - A fibrous protein forming the main structural constituent of hair, feathers, hoofs, claws, horns, etc. (even dinosaur horns)
Percolate - verb - (of a liquid or gas) filter gradually through a porous surface or substance.
Percolate - verb - Spread gradually through an area or group of people. "continental ideas on art, science, and architecture percolated from Venice to London"
Serrated - adjective - Having or denoting a jagged edge; sawlike. "a knife with a serrated edge"
Bulbous - adjective - Fat, round, or bulging. "a bulbous nose"
Quandary - noun - A state of perplexity or uncertainty over what to do in a difficult situation. "Kate was in a quandary"
Quandary - noun - A difficult situation; a practical dilemma. "a legal quandary"
Placid - adjective - Not easily upset or excited. "a placid, contented man"
Placid - adjective - Calm and peaceful, with little movement or activity. "the placid waters of a small lake"
FACT: Tyrannosaurus Rex's name translates to "King Tyrant Lizard".
FACT: Babies are born with about 300 bones, almost a third of which eventually fuse together to form the 206-bone skeleton of an adult. 
FACT: Fingernails grow 4 times faster than toenails.
FACT: Africa is pulling away from the middle East at about a rate of 1cm per year.
FACT: Dodoma, is the capital of The United Republic Of Tanzania.
FACT: Niamey is the capital and largest city of the West African country Niger.
Discrepancy - noun - An illogical or surprising lack of compatibility or similarity between two or more facts. "there's a discrepancy between your account and his"
Pervasive - adjective - (especially of an unwelcome influence or physical effect) spreading widely throughout an area or a group of people. "ageism is pervasive and entrenched in our society"
Ungainly - adjective - (of a person or movement) awkward; clumsy. "an ungainly walk"
Stilted - adjective - (of a manner of talking or writing) stiff and self-conscious or unnatural. "we made stilted conversation"
FACT: Albert Einstein was born in 14 March 1879 and died on April 18th 1955.
Sombre - adjective - Dark or dull in colour or tone. "the night skies were sombre and starless"
Sombre - adjective - Having or conveying a feeling of deep seriousness and sadness. "he looked at her with a sombre expression"
Plaintive - adjective - Sounding sad and mournful. "a plaintive cry"
Ineluctable - adjective - Unable to be resisted or avoided; inescapable. "the ineluctable facts of history"
Abortive - adjective - Failing to produce the intended result. "the rebel officers who led the abortive coup were shot"
Esteem - noun - Respect and admiration. "he was held in high esteem by colleagues"
QUOTE: "It takes two people to make you feel bad about yourself: the one who slurs you, and you if you accept it" - David Bodanis, Einstein's greatest mistake.
Fact: The name Jeep comes from the army abbreviation G.P for general purpose vehicle.
Reprieve - verb - Cancel or postpone the punishment of (someone, especially someone condemned to death). "under the new regime, prisoners under sentence of death were reprieved"
Punctilious - adjective - Showing great attention to detail or correct behaviour. "he was punctilious in providing every amenity for his guests"
Impermeable - adjective - Not allowing fluid to pass through. "an impermeable membrane"
Whimsical - adjective - Playfully quaint or fanciful, especially in an appealing and amusing way. "a whimsical sense of humour"
Whimsical - adjective - Acting or behaving in a capricious manner. "the whimsical arbitrariness of autocracy"
Depredation - noun - An act of attacking or plundering. "protecting grain from the depredations of rats and mice"
Tittle - noun - A tiny amount or part of something. "the rules have not been altered one jot or tittle since"
Tittle - noun - ARCHAIC A small written or printed stroke or dot, indicating omitted letters in a word. (The dot on i or j).
Lustrous - adjective - Having lustre; shining. "large, lustrous eyes"
Lustre - noun - A gentle sheen or soft glow. "the lustre of the Milky Way"
Visceral - adjective - Relating to deep inward feelings rather than to the intellect. "the voters' visceral fear of change"
Plenary - adjective - Unqualified; absolute. "crusaders were offered a plenary indulgence by the Pope"
Plenary - adjective - (of a meeting) to be attended by all participants at a conference or assembly, who otherwise meet in smaller groups. "a plenary session of the European Parliament"
Bastion - noun - A projecting part of a fortification built at an angle to the line of a wall, so as to allow defensive fire in several directions.
Bastion - noun - An institution, place, or person strongly maintaining particular principles, attitudes, or activities. "cricket's last bastion of discrimination"
Guttural - adjective - (of a speech sound) produced in the throat; harsh-sounding.
Obdurate - adjective - Stubbornly refusing to change one's opinion or course of action. "I argued this point with him, but he was obdurate"
Substantive - adjective - Having a firm basis in reality and so important, meaningful, or considerable. "there is no substantive evidence for the efficacy of these drugs"
QUOTE: "The distinction between past, present and future is only an illusion, however tenacious this illusion may be" - Albert Einstein.
FACT: 5% of Americans believe Paul McCartney died in 1966 and was replaced by a double. 14% are unsure.
Bête noire - noun - A person or thing that one particularly dislikes. "great-uncle Edward was my father's bête noire"
Pre-emptive - adjective - Serving or intended to pre-empt or forestall something, especially to prevent attack by disabling the enemy. "a pre-emptive strike"
QUOTE: "Every block of stone has a statue inside it and it is the task of the sculptor to discover it" - Michelangelo.
FACT: The University of York announced they would celebrate International Men's Day addressing male issues, especially suicide. 200 activist students protested and the event was canceled. This happened less than 24 hours after a male student at York killed himself.
Inarticulate - adjective - Unable to express one's ideas or feelings clearly or easily. "an inarticulate man of action"
Gall - noun - Bold and impudent behaviour. "the bank had the gall to demand a fee"
Grandstand - noun - The main stand, usually roofed, commanding the best view for spectators at racecourses or sports grounds.
Grandstand - noun - (of a view) seen from an advantageous position, as if from a grandstand. "a balcony which gave us a grandstand view of Loch Fyne"
Grandstand - noun - Seek to attract applause or favourable attention from spectators or the media. "they accused him of political grandstanding"
FACT: Canadian Journal of Psychiatry found 59% increase in suicidal thoughts, 61% increase in mood disorders and a 261% increase in alcohol abuse in women after abortions.
Travesty - noun - A false, absurd, or distorted representation of something. "the absurdly lenient sentence is a travesty of justice"
Sacrosanct - adjective - (especially of a principle, place, or routine) regarded as too important or valuable to be interfered with. "the individual's right to work has been upheld as sacrosanct"
Entreaty - noun - An earnest or humble request. "the king turned a deaf ear to his entreaties"
FACT: When the titanic sank, 2228 people were on it. Only 706 survived.
Wantonly - adverb - In a deliberate and unprovoked manner. "during the raids, the police wantonly destroyed property"
Wantonly - adverb - In a sexually immodest or promiscuous manner. "she pressed herself against him wantonly"
Perturbation - noun - Anxiety; mental uneasiness. "she sensed her friend's perturbation"
FACT: Yonge street in Toronto, Canada is the longest street in the world measuring 1,896km.
Raucous - adjective - Making or constituting a disturbingly harsh and loud noise. "raucous youths"
Redolent - adjective - Strongly reminiscent or suggestive of. "names redolent of history and tradition"
Adjunct - noun - A thing added to something else as a supplementary rather than an essential part. "computer technology is an adjunct to learning"
QUOTE: "In times of universal deceit, telling the truth is a revolutionary act" - George Orwell.
Catty - adjective - Deliberately hurtful in one's remarks; spiteful. "catty comments"
Sparse - adjective - Thinly dispersed or scattered. "areas of sparse population"
Sparse - adjective - Scanty; in short supply. "information on earnings is sparse"
Mendacity - noun - Untruthfulness. "people publicly castigated for past mendacity"
PROVERB: "Ad nauseam" a Latin term for argument or other discussion that has continued 'to [the point of] nausea'. For example, the sentence "This topic has been discussed ad nauseam".
Laudable - adjective - (of an action, idea, or aim) deserving praise and commendation. "laudable though the aim might be, the results have been criticized"
QUOTE: "The man who views the world at 50 the same as he did at 20 has wasted 30 years of his life" - Muhammad Ali.
Ribald - adjective - Referring to sexual matters in an amusingly rude or irreverent way. "a ribald comment"
Abrasive - adjective - (of a substance or material) capable of polishing or cleaning a hard surface by rubbing or grinding. "the wood should be rubbed down with fine abrasive paper"
Abrasive - adjective - Showing little concern for the feelings of others; harsh. "her abrasive and arrogant personal style won her few friends"
Genesis - noun - The origin or mode of formation of something. "this tale had its genesis in fireside stories"
Incredulously - adverb - In a manner indicating disbelief. ""What ?" I asked incredulously"
FACT: Coffee is the second most traded commodity on the planet after oil.
Melanin - noun - A dark brown to black pigment occurring in the hair, skin, and iris of the eye in people and animals. It is responsible for tanning of skin exposed to sunlight.
Overton window - noun - also known as the window of discourse, is the range of ideas tolerated in public discourse.
Degenerate - adjective - Having lost the physical, mental, or moral qualities considered normal and desirable; showing evidence of decline. "a degenerate form of a higher civilization"
FACT: Dolphins & whales are conscious breathers, meaning they actively decide to breathe. To sleep, dolphins and whales allow one half of their brain to sleep at a time.
Quote: "Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly they are ravening wolves." Matthew 7:15.
Transgression - noun - An act that goes against a law, rule, or code of conduct; an offence. "I'll be keeping an eye out for further transgressions"
Moribund - adjective - (of a person) at the point of death. "on examination she was moribund and dehydrated"
Moribund - adjective - (of a thing) in terminal decline; lacking vitality or vigour. "the moribund commercial property market"
Fractious - adjective - (typically of children) irritable and quarrelsome. "they fight and squabble like fractious children"
Fractious - adjective - (of a group or organization) difficult to control; unruly. "King Malcolm struggled to unite his fractious kingdom".
FACT: Two recently published reports suggest humans have a mild form of unihemspheric brain sleep (one side of the brain sleeps at a time). If a human sleeps in an unfamiliar environment (like a hotel) one half of the brain sleeps less, being slightly more vigil.
Retrograde - adjective - Directed or moving backwards. "a retrograde flow"
Retrograde - adjective - Reverting to an earlier and inferior condition. "to go back on the progress that has been made would be a retrograde step"
Gauche - adjective - Unsophisticated and socially awkward. "a shy and gauche teenager"
Malaise - noun - A general feeling of discomfort, illness, or unease whose exact cause is difficult to identify. "a general air of malaise"
Temerity - noun - Excessive confidence or boldness; audacity. "no one had the temerity to question his conclusions"
Irreverence - noun - A lack of respect for people or things that are generally taken seriously. "an attitude of irreverence towards politicians"
Mirth - noun - Amusement, especially as expressed in laughter. "his six-foot frame shook with mirth"
Deleterious - adjective - FORMAL - Causing harm or damage. "divorce is assumed to have deleterious effects on children"
Disquiet - noun - A feeling of worry or unease. "public disquiet about animal testing"
Disquiet - verb - Make (someone) worried or uneasy. "she felt disquieted at the lack of interest the girl had shown"
Quagmire - noun - A soft boggy area of land that gives way underfoot. "torrential rain turned the building site into a quagmire"
Quagmire - noun - An awkward, complex, or hazardous situation. "a legal quagmire"
Seminal - adjective - Strongly influencing later developments. "his seminal work on chaos theory"
Endogenous - adjective - Having an internal cause or origin. "the expected rate of infection is endogenous to the system"
Diurnal - adjective - Of or during the day.
Proverbial - adjective - (of a word or phrase) referred to in a proverb or idiom. "I'm going to stick out like the proverbial sore thumb"
Acclimatize - verb - Become accustomed to a new climate or new conditions; adjust. "it's unknown whether people will acclimatize to increasingly warm weather"
Recumbent - adjective - (especially of a person or effigy) lying down. "recumbent statues"
QUOTE: "The best way to remember your wife's birthday is to forget it once" - E. Joseph Crossman.
QUOTE: "The best bridge between hope and despair is a good night's sleep" - E. Joseph Crossman.
FACT: Ottawa is the capital of Canada.
FACT: Dr. Alois Alzheimer from Germany discovered Alzheimer's disease in 1906.
Parsimonious - adjective - Very unwilling to spend money or use resources. "even the parsimonious Joe paid for drinks all round"
Macabre - adjective - Disturbing because concerned with or causing a fear of death. "a macabre series of murders"
FACT: Biphasic sleep refers to sleep habits that involve a person sleeping for two segments per day. Sleeping during nighttime hours and taking a midday nap.
QUOTE: "Time and space are modes by which we think and not conditions in which we live" - Albert Einstein.
FACT: In 2007, the W.H.O declared night shift work as 'probable carcinogen'".
Epidermis - noun - The outer, protective, nonvascular layer of the skin of vertebrates, covering the dermis.
Epidermis - noun - An integument or outer layer of various invertebrates.
Epidermis - noun - The outermost layer of cells covering the leaves and young parts of a plant.
Fictitious - adjective - Not real or true; imaginary or fabricated. "reports of a deal were dismissed as fictitious by the Minister"
Timorous - adjective - Showing or suffering from nervousness or a lack of confidence. "a timorous voice"
Perpetuity - noun - The state or quality of lasting forever. "he did not believe in the perpetuity of military rule"
Synergistic - adjective - Relating to the interaction or cooperation of two or more organizations, substances, or other agents to produce a combined effect greater than the sum of their separate effects. "the synergistic interaction of mind and body"
FACT: Inemuri is the Japanese practice of sleeping on the job. It literally means, "sleeping while present".
Verbose - adjective - Using or expressed in more words than are needed. "much academic language is obscure and verbose"
Anhedonia - noun - PSYCHIATRY Inability to feel pleasure in normally pleasurable activities.
Aperture - noun - An opening, hole, or gap. "the bell ropes passed through apertures in the ceiling"
Lambaste - verb - Criticize (someone or something) harshly. "they lambasted the report as a gross distortion of the truth"
Maladaptive - adjective - TECHNICAL Not adjusting adequately or appropriately to the environment or situation. "maladaptive coping strategies such as increasing consumption of alcohol"
Auspice - noun - A sign indicative of future prospects; an omen: Auspices for the venture seemed favorable.
FACT: Nassau is the capital of Bahamas.
QUOTE: "Sleep that knits up the ravell'd sleave of care, the death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, chief nourisher in life's feast" - William Shakespeare, MacBeth.
FACT: Denmark paid compensation to night shift women who developed breast cancer after UN health body said working night shifts probably increased their chances of getting cancer.
FACT: Fatal Familiar Insomnia (FFI) is a rare sleep disorder that runs in families. It affects the thalmus, which normally block perception of the outside world. Theres no cure and death occurs in 12-18 months.
FACT: Amyloid beta are involved in Alzheimer's disease, the main component of plaque build up in Alzheimers patients.
FACT: Kenneth Parks, a married man with two kids & a gambling problem was found innocent of murder because of sleepwalking. He fell asleep watching TV, drove to his in-law's house and murdered his mother-in-law with a tire iron. 
Effluent - noun - Liquid waste or sewage discharged into a river or the sea. "industrial effluent"
Inviolable - adjective - Never to be broken, infringed, or dishonoured. "an inviolable rule of chastity"
Pro bono - adverb & adjective - Denoting work undertaken without charge, especially legal work for a client on low income. "the attorneys are representing him pro bono"
Carcinogen - noun - A substance capable of causing cancer in living tissue.
De novo - adverb & adjective - Starting from the beginning; anew. "in a pure meritocracy, everyone must begin de novo"
Deft - adjective - Neatly skilful and quick in one's movements. "a deft piece of footwork"
Deft - adjective - Demonstrating skill and cleverness. "the script was both deft and literate"
Somnambulism - noun - Sleepwalking. "she would have liked to wake up from her somnambulism to find herself back in bed"
Divulge - verb - Make known (private or sensitive information). "I am too much of a gentleman to divulge her age"
Sterile - adjective - Not able to produce children or young. "the disease had made him sterile"
Sterile - adjective - Free from bacteria or other living microorganisms; totally clean. "a sterile needle and syringes"
Sterile - adjective - (of land or soil) too poor in quality to produce crops. "vast tracts of sterile desert land"
Sterile - adjective - Lacking in imagination, creativity, or excitement; uninspiring or unproductive. "he found the fraternity's teachings sterile"
Tenable - adjective - Able to be maintained or defended against attack or objection. "such a simplistic approach is no longer tenable"
FACT: Archduke Franz Ferdinand was assassinated on 28th of July 1914 in Sarajevo.
FACT: Sarajevo is the capital of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Caliphate - noun - HISTORICAL The rule or reign of a caliph or chief Muslim ruler. "the Umayyad caliphate in Damascus was overthrown by the Abbasids"
QUOTE: "You can fool all the people some of the time, and some of the people all the time, but you cannot fool all the people all the time" - Abraham Lincoln.
QUOTE: "Democracy is the worst form of goverment, except for all the others" - Winston Churchill.
FACT: The American Civil War was faught from 1861-1865. The Unionists proclaimed support for the constitution where as the Confederates of the South faught for slavery.
Antediluvian - adjective - Of or belonging to the time before the biblical Flood. "gigantic bones of antediluvian animals"
Antediluvian - adjective - HUMOROUS Ridiculously old-fashioned. "they maintain antediluvian sex-role stereotypes"
Philistine - noun - A person who is hostile or indifferent to culture and the arts. "I am a complete philistine when it comes to paintings"
FACT: Universal Basic Income is a system that the government provides every citizen with a regular permanent cash payment intended to lift everyone out of poverty.
Lugubrious - adjective - Looking or sounding sad and dismal. "his face looked even more lugubrious than usual"
Rapacious - adjective - Aggressively greedy or grasping. "rapacious landlords"
Diaphanous - adjective - (especially of fabric) light, delicate, and translucent. "a diaphanous dress of pale gold"
QUOTE: "From the cultural, religious and humanistic inheritance of Europe, from which developed the universal values of the inviolable and inalienable rights of the human person, freedom, democracy, equality and the rule of law." - Journal of Europe.
Demure - adjective - (of a woman or her behaviour) reserved, modest, and shy. "a demure little wife who sits at home minding the house"
Demure - adjective - (of clothing) suggesting that a woman is demure. "a demure white lace cap"
QUOTE: "Do not seek revenge or bear a grudge against anyone among your people, but love your neighbor as you love yourself" - Leviticus (19:18)
FACT: The national flag of Nepal is the world's only non-quadrilateral national flag.
Cavil - verb - Make petty or unnecessary objections. "they cavilled at the cost"
Clairvoyant - noun - A person who claims to have a supernatural ability to perceive events in the future or beyond normal sensory contact. "she has had a message from a clairvoyant that her son is alive and well"
Abecedarian - adjective - Arranged alphabetically. "in abecedarian sequence"
FACT: From 2015, Christianity has 2.3 billion followers, Islam has 1.8 billion, Hinduism has 1 billion, Buddhism has 500 million and there are only 15 million Jews.
FACT: Movies with sound took off in the 1920's. The Jazz Singer (1927) is the first full length film to be considered a "talkie".
FACT: The Holocene is the current geographic epoch. It began around 11,650 years ago after the last "Ice Age".
Linchpin - noun - A person or thing vital to an enterprise or organization. "nurses are the linchpin of the National Health Service"
Badinage - noun - Humorous or witty conversation. "he developed a nice line in badinage with the Labour leader"
Luminary - noun - A person who inspires or influences others, especially one prominent in a particular sphere. "one of the luminaries of child psychiatry"
Mirthful - adjective - Full of mirth; merry or amusing. "mirthful laughter"
Delectable - adjective - (of food or drink) delicious. "delectable handmade chocolates"
QUOTE: "Questions you cannot answer are usually far better for you than answers you cannot question" - Yuval Noah Harari.
FACT: The Automatic Teller Machine (ATM) was introduced in England 1965.